intro: how BR thought of it, no one thought ESPN would work (there were no 24-hour channels back then), what he did to get it off the ground, how long it took before it became obvious that his idea was a great one
When Bill Rasmussen first entered the world of sports reporting, his prospects did not seem bright. He had no official education or training in journalism, and had drifted into sports reporting only after other jobs didn't work out. Few would have predicted that he would launch the venture that completely revolutionized not only sports journalism, but the whole world of sports entertainment. In fact, some would say that Bill Rasmussen's brain child, Entertainment Sports Programming Network, changed the world of sports itself.
Yet little in Rasmussen's background or early career would have foreshadowed his success.

What happened next is sometimes described as Scott's coming up with the idea for a sports TV cable network along with his father, and sometimes as Bill's coming up with the idea along with his son. It seems that more credence is given to its having been Bill's brain child, with contributing efforts from Scott.

(In fact, there seems to have been some idea early on that it would focus mostly or wholly on the Hartford Whalers, though this idea is not often mentioned in retellings of the early history of ESPN. It seems that it may have been contributed by another early partner, one associated with the Whalers, who dropped out of the partnership when they ran into early funding problems.) Bill Rasmussen envisioned buying a few hours of cable time a night and filling it with coverage of Connecticut sports.


At this time, cable time was new and expensive, but satellite communications were almost unknown. Not only would the satellite feed go for twenty-four hours a day, Rasmussen learned, but it would reach nationwide audiences - all for less than the cost of the few hours of cable time he had envisioned buying

Most of the investors who had initially been interested in Rasmussen's plan evaporated once they learned how it had changed in the scale and scope of its ambition.
Rasmussen, however, persisted. Using nine thousand dollars of his own savings and another thirty thousand that he had borrowed from relatives, he continued to develop his idea. In order to get his network started, however - to buy the satellite transponder that it would require, as well as land on which to situate the transponder where it would have an unobstructed signal, along with other significant capital investments - Rasmussen needed real money. In vain he tried to convince his investors that there was an audience (and advertisers) who were interested in twenty-four-hour sports coverage.

Although ESPN has had many owners since its 1979 launch, it has always kept the basic format that Rasmussen devised at the outset: twenty-four-hour coverage of sporting events, combined with a few sporting news shows that would give more in-depth coverage of sporting news and analysis. In fact, many credit ESPN with creating the sports analysis news show as we know it today.

It is still considered the touchstone for sports news programming, and has created a new tone for presenting sports news that is among the strongest influences on sports reporting today.
Changes in ownership


who had been a sportscaseter on Connecticut TV station WTNH, Channel 8 based in New Haven, and

Berman helped to create the show's breezy, catch-phrase-rich style that ultimately became a signature not only of SportsCenter but of ESPN as a whole.
One element of SportsCenter that helped to define its irreverent tone, while also underlining its claim to being close to important developments in the sporting world, was its series of ads for the show. The series as a whole was called This is SportsCenter. Most of the ads took some aspect of sports life and incorporated it into what is supposed to be behind-the-scenes life at ESPN. Several of the spots included recognizable figures from the world of sports seemingly performing some mundane function in the ESPN offices. Examples of these include:

flubbing one or more phrases each time he tries. The camera cuts to a room full of replacement anchors seated on a bench like relief pitchers in baseball, several of whom are engaged in various warm-up activities for anchoring such as pointing at the camera and saying "This is SportsCenter ." Back in the studio, Kenny Mayne's producer approaches him gently, saying, "Maybe it's just not your night, big guy." Kenny insists that he can do it and pleads with the producer to give him one more chance. In the end, the producer calls the "bullpen" and San Diego Padres closer Trevor Hoffman comes jogging out to take the anchor's chair, while Kenny Mayne throws his pencil down in disgust at being yanked from the game. Another famous spot shows the SportsCenter anchors talking to prospective new reporters as though they are new recruits to a fairly low-level, poorly-paid sports team, telling them that sometimes if their throats get sore from talking on camera, the network will pay for them to see a throat doctor.
Connections with Professional Sports Franchises
If SportsCenter was what helped give ESPN its tone, it was the network's close connections and, in some cases, exclusive agreements with professional and college sports teams and leagues that helped it build its claim to being the best source for sports coverage, analysis, and news anywhere.

(It set out to compete "indirectly" in that it intended to fill the football-less months during spring and summer; however, before long the USFL's owners and directors voted against strong minority opposition to compete directly by playing in the fall and winter. Most observers agreed that this decision, coupled with other myriad examples of mismanagement, led directly to the USFL's collapse after only three years.)

Without the presence of a broadcast partner that had many hours to fill and that was new enough to the sports broadcasting world to be eager for professional partnerships, the USFL likely would not have received much air time and would probably have folded sooner. The fact that it was not able to take advantage of the boost offered them by this piece of timely good fortune suggests that mismanagement was in fact rife at the USFL and was the reason it failed.


This was an important condition in 1987, when the majority of television watchers still watched only free broadcast television and being a cable subscriber was still relatively uncommon. It was one thing for a fringe league such as USFL to be available for viewing only on a cable channel, but the idea of having NFL games available only to paying cable subscribers was at that time unthinkable.

but ESPN contends that it at least falls under the rubric of "sports entertainment" which is its bailiwick.
Expansion of ESPN as a network


suggesting that having started out struggling to fill twenty-four hours a day, the network now had content for more than twenty-four hours a day.


a genial but sometimes intense three hours of sports commentary and analysis hosted by Mike Greenberg (a sports journalist) and Mike Golic (a former NFL linebacker). The show has been highly rated and has kept its prime spot since 2006.
Mike and Mike is only shown, however, on weekdays. This leaves Saturday morning open for the event that perhaps should more rightfully be dubbed the network's centerpiece: "Bass Saturday." As its name suggests, during "Bass Saturday" only programs concerning coverage, analysis, and news relating to bass fishing are shown. It is not known what process is used to select, from among all of the bass fishing programs currently being filmed and made available to a viewing public, those few that will become part of "Bass Saturday." Presumably it involves algorithms that were developed in-house and must be considered proprietary.


with their slanted red block letters with a white stripe cutting horizontally through the letters.)

Criticism of ESPN
As is inevitable when a network gets as close to the sources and subjects of its news as ESPN does, the network has had to endure criticism, some of it harsh, of the way int which it has covered specific sports. Its coverage of Major League Baseball came in for some particular criticism, especially in the following areas:
Barry Bonds.

With so many errors like these coming so close together in 2007, it is no surprise that in 2008 ESPN made a concerted effort to improve its NASCAR coverage. It is responsiveness of this kind that has allowed ESPN to maintain its standing among fans of all ages, backgrounds, and sports.