The word "current" has several meanings, all of which have connotations of dynamism, freshness, relevance. It can mean "up to the present moment" - that which is new and fresh. It can also describe patterns of movement in elements such as air, water, or electricity - patterns that can be difficult to see, but that are capable of moving with great force and creating immense amounts of energy. When applied to electricity, it can even be synonymous with "power" - as in "Danger - Live Current!" These meanings even place it at the root of the word "currency" - that is, a substance can hold value (power), and that can at any moment be redeemed at that token value.
It's little wonder, therefore, that the word is often chosen as a name for news media. It connotes a sense of something flowing toward the audience, something that is potent, up-to-the-minute, and immediate. Yet the media that use it might seem to have little else in common.
Current: The Newspaper About Public Broadcasting in the United States
Current - one version of it, at least - is a newspaper that covers topics related to public radio and public television.

Or as the Public Broadcasting Service used to say in its promotions: "It's made possible by viewers like you."


though it seems inevitable that this must change before long

Public broadcasting in the United states is extremely heterogeneous, populated as it is by large numbers of

Current and the Firing of Bob Edwards Having such a public meeting place has been important for public broadcasting when internal events threatened to weaken it through internecine conflict. One such event was when Bob Edwards, the iconic host of National Public Radio's Morning Edition and a beloved figure to many public radio listeners, was fired after thirty years with the program. Edwards' distinctive voice and distinguished delivery were, for many people, the voice of public radio, and his departure caused a great deal of internal conflict. Some people felt that his firing was an ominous sign that National Public Radio was sacrificing gravitas and integrity in search of some more exciting or entertaining sound - that they were, in short, compromising their principles and their very identity in the hopes of competing with more vapid, attention-grabbing forms of media.
As it turned out, the firing had happened because National Public Radio felt that Morning Edition's sound had been too much the same for too long, and wanted Edwards to switch to a two-host format. This Edwards did not want to do, and National Public Radio was unwilling to allow the program's format to remain as it was.

The two-host arrangement would make Morning Edition's coverage of news and events stronger, according to National Public Radio's senior vice-president of programming, Jay Kernis. The new format would provide for increased flexibility in covering emerging news stories while continuing to prepare for future programs. Also, Morning Edition is first presented at five o'clock in the morning (Eastern U.S. Time) and repeats until noon,

with a sort of "reboot" every hour. That is, the show does not exactly repeat every hour; lead stories may change or shift the order in which they are presented, or new information may cause these stories to be expanded, to use different clips from the ground where they're being reported, or to require a different introduction, conclusion, or commentary from the host.

This ongoing revision and expansion of the show on the fly would, NPR felt, be much easier with two hosts. In addition, it would allow for the hosts to sometimes report directly from the field, meaning they would have more hands-on experience with the news that would make their hosting sound more informed, involved, and immediate - more like reporting, in other words. Though Edwards was much beloved, he had been criticized at time for sounded disengaged.


After Edwards left, the public broadcasting world erupted in a storm of passionate protest and defense. Current provided a place for a public conversation to take place, and thus for everyone to work through their opinions and emotions on the subject. In the weeks after Edwards' departure was announced, Current published a number of pieces in which it gave many sides of the story, including some impassioned protest. Among the arguments made by the protesters were:


- Edwards' firing is a sign of NPR's descent into media vacuity

National Public Radio had been seen by many as different from other institutions; now, they found, even it could let them down by acting like a large institution with difficult choices to make.

Many listeners, and media commentators, did not feel that Edwards had left because NPR was insisting on a format that he did not want, but that he had been forced out because of his age (which at the time was 56).

A few respondents, who were also given voice in Current , had dissenting opinions about whether Edwards' departure was quite the disaster it was being claimed to be.

For his part, Edwards appeared to have been listening to the ongoing discussion - including critical remarks like those above. When he weighed in, his contribution did much to calm the protests. Edwards

Edwards urged listeners to remember that everything must change, that he would still be on public radio in another venue, and to give Morning Edition's new format, and new hosts, a fair chance. Current's role as a place for public broadcasting's widely scattered, heterogeneous community to come together was an important part of helping National Public Radio (and Edwards) through what might have been a disaster for both.
Current.tv: Al Gore's Television Website
In the early years of the 2000s, several websites thought it would be a good idea to challenge YouTube's dominance in the "homemade video made available to everyone" field. One of the more serious - that is, less given to being taken over by videos of people's cats playing the piano - was the site established by former U.S. Vice President Al Gore.

Before long, Current.tv had come to identify itself more as a cable TV channel with an online presence that interacted with its broadcast presence - not a website that showed content on "real television."

It changed its name from Current.tv to Current, dropping the ".tv," becoming less about creating video content on news topics, and more about different ways to share social media on similar topics. The focus on the user-created video diminished somewhat, as the network began instead to search for broader ways for users and viewers to share news and discuss ideas.


The reasons for the shift were simple: the strategy team at Current.tv had realized that

If that infrastructure could be provided for them, the idea went, they would produce a level of journalism never seen before - journalism that was "real" and "raw" and that carried with it the authenticity of being "from the people."


It could be argued, of course, that this has never been true in American history - not after Gutenberg, not when the United States was founded, perhaps not at any time. Slavery and its ever-tainted legacies of bigotry and fear certainly give the lie to the idea that the political origins of the United States derive from an open, free-flowing marketplace of ideas in which any individual could contribute to the public forum - as does the exclusion of women and non-landowners from public discussion. Discrimination against non-landowners was the first type of exclusion to be rectified; women would not be permitted even to have the vote until 1920.
African-Americans technically received the right to vote in 1868, when the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution established "equal protection" - that is, that no citizen of the United States could have his or her citizen-based rights abrogated in any way. This was not enough for most of America, however, and the Fifteenth Amendment, passed in 1870, specified that no group could be treated differently or discriminated against in any way based on race, creed, or color. This only launched a long series of attempts, many of them largely successful, to indirectly rob African-Americans of the vote using methods such as a poll tax, a literacy test, or - in the most recent example - by requiring voters to apply for increasingly complicated forms of photographic identification, and then selectively denying the applications of individuals who, as it happened, were African-American. This last example took place in September 2012.
Of course, it also took place during the re-election campaign of the United States' first African-American president, showing that American public life has made significant progress from the days when its Constitution had to be amended in order to clarify that people must not be treated as less than human - but it is an indication that the principles of free and open participation in a democracy cannot be taken for granted, but must be constantly defended .
All of this is not to question the validity of the principle that Gore wished to uphold - only to point out that, to the extent that he was presenting it as a lost ideal disrupted by television's dominance, he is indulging in nostalgia for something that never existed, and might be wiser to present it as an ideal toward which we are still moving.


This is a fine idea, and perhaps somewhat less open to being historically and factually discredited than his first. Yet it must be acknowledged that the merit of an idea can only be judged by the people participating in the marketplace, and they will judge it based upon their own notions of merit, using their own set of values. Was the idea that humans should not be enslaved any more meritorious in 1865 than it had been for the previous two hundred years? Apparently not, because it did not win in the marketplace of ideas even then; it had to be enforced by the rule of law.


Oh, Al. One can only hope that Al Gore does not spend a great deal of time reading Internet forums, as his ideals may have taken quite a hit if he does. If nothing else, his idea that everyone has an equally valuable contribution to the discourse may have become severely compromised.
It might be thought that Gore was presenting these ideals as a goal to work toward - not a vision of a lost past. But when describing the effect of broadcast television coming to dominate public discourse over news and politics,

If so...then what, we might ask, accounts for the strangeness of all the times that have preceded this one?
It is hard to argue, however, with Gore's basic argument that

(in which he, depending on one's information, either won the election but not the presidency, or was defeated by George W. Bush).

Americans have become accustomed to the idea that they will not contribute in a meaningful way to discussions over the most important issues of the day that significantly affect everyone's lives. It is time, Gore said,

Gore and his team also recognized that creating and producing documentary and reporting video required, not just the technological architecture, but a certain set of skills and tools that not everyone had - in fact, that most people don't have. Current set about attempting to democratize that aspect of user-generated content as well,

Both when it launched and when it reinvented itself, many in the online media world were skeptical - partly that Current could engage its viewers/users to the extent that Gore and his team seemed to think possible, but primarily that they could make this model pay.

many were expecting to hear the same story from both firms: a reiteration of the great ideas behind their service, a testament to how much their users loved them, and a cautious projection that making money might, perhaps, be on the table in the future - but it was secondary to continuing to do the fantastic things they did.
From Evan Williams, they got what they expected.

Seeing the financial success of this venture - seeing it victorious in the marketplace of products - makes one feel more sanguine about its prospects in the marketplace of ideas. It suggests that perhaps Al Gore was not merely indulging in a beautiful idealism when he laid out his principles for the marketplace of ideas that he wished to create.
His vision was further validated when, in 2007, Al Gore and his co-founder Joel Hyatt won the first-ever-awarded Emmy Award for interactive television.

That made 2007 a banner year for Gore: in addition to winning the Emmy, his film about global warming, An Inconvenient Truth , won an Academy Award for Best Documentary. Later in the year, Gore won the Nobel Peace Prize.


Current's, and Current.tv's, history has not, however, been one unbroken string of successes. When it was first founded, it was immediately slammed with lawsuits over its name - going back to the introduction to this piece and the appeal of the word current as a name and descriptor for media outlets.