The campus is located on a beautiful 65-acre waterfront that is in the heart of the historic Mystic area shoreline in the southeastern part of Connecticut. It is is a private, coeducational and residential college that Mitchell College enrolls more tha n 700 full-time students from all over the country and around the world. The college is dedicated in providing a student-centered and supportive learning environment addressing the educational needs of different students including those students who have learning disabilities.

Mitchell College faculty embraces the task of developing intellectual capabilities of students. The staff has been specifically trained for services and programs and that encourage academic as well as personal growth. Contact Information

437, Pequot Ave,
New London, CT 06320,
Main Phone: 860-7015000
Web Site: www.mitchell.edu

Academic Life

Mitchell's academic programs were founded in the liberal arts tradition and these programs are relevant to today's world. The students must opt for one course in literature, mathematics, expository writing, computer applications, sociology or psychology, speech, lab science and wellness. The maximum length of a program is more than 4 years and the highest degree offered by the college is the Bachelor's degree.

Those students who are undecided about their academic majors are enrolled in the Discovery Program, which has been specifically designed to provide additional advising, special courses and services that help them to realize their potential. All these further help them to settle on an academic major. The students are also supported by the Tutoring Center that offers unlimited free tutoring by professionals in each and every academic discipline.

Students who have been with diagnosed learning disabilities may get enrolled in the Learning Resource Center, which helps them by providing supplemental instructions and support apart from the regular academic program.

Semesters run from January to May and from September to December. Summer sessions are also available but these have limited course offerings. Resources and Facilities

Mitchell College has been nationally recognized for its C.A.R.E.S. model which stands for Careering, Advising, Retaining, Educating and Supporting. These are the five areas which have been determined by Mitchell and these are critical to the student academic success. This program offers active support in each and every area of a student's life at Mitchell College, right from orientation to graduation. The Discovery Program, the Tutoring Center, the Learning Resource Center, the Center for Student Academic Success, the Career and Transfer Center are parts of the C.A.R.E.S. Values model.

The campus boasts of a 45,000 volume library, a fully equipped gymnasium, a fitness center, two primary classroom instruction buildings along with indoor recreational areas. The seven residence halls offer the students with a variety of living styles who can opt to live in one of the four Victorian or Colonial homes or in any of three traditional residence halls. All rooms have been equipped with dual telephone and computer jacks along with Cable TV connections.

LITS Events

Mitchell College Library hosts a variety of cultural events which are free and open to the public.

Campus Life

Mitchell College strongly encourages its students in being involved in campus activities which are outside the classrooms. This leads to an overall personal growth in areas like leadership, citizenship and relationships. Participation in clubs, intramural activities, dances, off-campus weekend trips , catching the school spirit by way of cheering at an athletic event Student clubs are a reflection various interests of students, faculty and staff. At present, the clubs like bike, business, education, psychology, multicultural, technology, ski and yearbook are active on the campus . Each year new clubs keep on appearing in order to match the interests of the Mitchell community. If a student does not find a club that he or she is interested in joining, then he or she is encouraged to start such a club. Intramural sports are a popular recreational outlet for the students of all interests and abilities at the competitive and also non-competitive levels. C omedians, c offeehouse performers and other entertainment shows are regularly scheduled.

Mitchell College is a member of the NJCAA or National Junior College Athletic Association. Besides the regular fitness and wellness program, the college fields eleven intercollegiate teams involving almost 30% of the students. Men play baseball, soccer, basketball and lacrosse. Women play basketball, volleyball, soccer and softball. Sailing, golf and tennis are co-ed.

As a member of the varsity team, performance of students in the classroom takes precedence over athletics. S.T.A.R.S. or Students Taking Academic Responsibility Seriously program of Mitchell has been specifically developed for athletes in order to help them to be successful in the classroom as well as the playing field. Admission Requirements

Admissions requirements of the college have been designed to select those students who are best able to benefit from the educational experience. A student must have graduated from high school or equivalent. In exceptional cases, a student may be recommended as academically as well as socially prepared to enter college. The Committee on Admissions recognizes those students who have different talents, geographical origins and contrasting backgrounds. The students are admitted without any regard to gender, race, color, age, disability or national origin. A student may file his or her application at any time during the academic session. The applications are promptly acted upon depending upon the plan of rolling admission as new students may enter this College in the months of September, January, May or July . In order to apply for admission, a student needs to file an application along with a non-refundable fee of $30. The students may request the high school guidance office to forward the official high school record and letter of recommendation along with SAT or ACT scores. In case a student has attended college or any other post-secondary programs, he or she must submit official transcripts from those institutions. Mitchell College annually awards financial aid that amounts to more than $3 million. Financial aid is provided both in case of need-based scholarships and in case of programs which have been designed to recognize the abilities of students in academics, athletics, community service and leadership. Accepted students who qualify for grants and scholarships, do not need to be repay back. Self-help aid which is in the form of loans has also been made available. Campus job opportunities are easily available for students, irrespective of their financial aid status. Mitchell Valued Potential or MVP scholarships are awarded according to an individual student's ability to make a contribution to the College. Athletic scholarships are offered to those students who participate in baseball, soccer, basketball, softball and lacrosse. In order to be considered for financial aid, a student must complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid or FAFSA along with the financial aid application of the college.

The Childrens Learning Center is dedicated to creating an environment which helps the children to gain independence, explore freely and thus develop a positive social relationship with their peers and teachers. Programs include morning as well as full day preschool along with a toddler/parent discovery program that provides quality learning experiences for the young children. During summer months, weekly sessions focusing on science, discovery and arts are offered at a school-age summer camp. It provides a wonderful environment for children to learn and grow.

Contact details for more information about Children's Learning Center:

Diane Gozemba,
Director - Children's Learning Center,
701 Montauk Avenue,
New London, CT 06320,
Phone: (860) 701-5150.