In 1980 Doris Christopher, a mother and home economics teacher started the Pampered Chef Company in Chicago, USA. In her work and home life she used tools and equipment but she found that the kitchen tools in the shops were not good enough quality for professional use, and not well designed either. While buying kitchen equipment from shops she also realised that the salespeople in the stores often didn't know a great deal about kitchen products. So she decided to set up The Pampered Chef to create and sell good quality and well designed kitchen implement.
Doris decided the best people to sell her products were housewives who used and understood kitchen equipment. It would be ideal for busy mums and housewives to sell their friends and family from their own homes. Customers could then see the products demonstrated, and try them out before they bought them. It wasn't long before her products were selling throughout America and in other countries too such as Germany, Britain and Canada. . Pampered chef went to the UK in 1999 and has flourished there too. There are more than 55,000 Pampered Chef Consultants worldwide.

The company was bought up by by Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Corporation in 2002 and currently has its headquarters in Addison, Illinois.


The Pampered Chef range features a massive range of products. There is cookware, stoneware collection

s including items such as baking trays and pizza stones, which are made using natural lead-free stone

, mixing bowls, rice cookers, peelers, whisks, serving sets, baking cutters, tableware, oven mitts, stir fry skillets, recipe cookbooks and loads more great items. All Pampered Chef products have at least a one year guarantee. If you have a Pampered Chef Consultant into your home to host a party, which they call a cooking show, you can claim free items from their catalogue. If you're interested in becoming a Pampered Chef Consultant yourself then this gives you an ideal opportunity to watch a trained consultant in action and learn from them. At a Pampered Chef cooking show you'll see multi purpose kitchen tools demonstrated and you'll learn some great recipes too!
You can easily join The Pampered Chef and start earning money with hours to suit your family and social needs . As an independent consultant with The Pampered Chef you benefit from being your own boss. You'll receive free training and support and free products. There are awards of jewellery and holidays for the top sellers, and of course you'll make some great new friends too!
it's a great job for a wide range of people. It is ideal for men or women with children who want a job that is flexible and can be arranged around child care. There are plenty of retired people with a passion for cooking and being in the kitchen who take up being a Pampered Chef Consultant to earn some extra money and to meet new people. You can work the hours you like, so it could be a whole new career for you, or just a little extra work to supplement your existing income .

As a Pampered Chef consultant you are self employed so you will need to register with your local Tax Office as self employed and complete a yearly self assessment form. Don't forget to claim back your expenses against tax. Transport, telephone calls and the Pampered Chef start up kit can all be claimed against tax.

When you start work as a Pampered Chef consultant, y ou have to buy The Pampered Chef start up kit. This includes the stationery and business materials for the shows. You must complete a minimum of six shows in your first year. Other than the start up kit, all you will need to buy are the catalogues and invitations. You will be able to claim these back against tax as expenses too. There are no hidden charges or other costs to you, however some Pampered Chef Consultants do like to provide food and drink for their show guests and often see a good return on their investment with a nice increase in sales as their guests are having a lovely time and are more likely to make a purchase.
You can hold your shows wherever you like, wherever is most convenient for you and your guests. They could be in the homes of your friends and family, at a pub, club or a village halls. Don't forget to give out business cards so guests at a show can book a Pampered Chef show in their own home.

Some people worry that they don't have the room for lots of stock, well there is no need to worry as you won't keep stock at home other than your demonstration items, which you can store and use in your own kitchen if you like. When you take orders you simply order the products online and they are posted not to you, but straight to the host of the show so you won't have to deliver any goods yourself.

