Elliptical training is an aerobic exercise that has become quite popular over the past few years. It combines the best of cross country skiing, stair climbing and running. It provides not only a low impact motion but variety rich workout.


It has several names and these are elliptical trainer, elliptical cross-trainer, elliptical machine or just elliptical. This home fitness equipment is simply fun and provides invigorating total body workout. It has been specially designed to move in the way your body moves. As a result, you get stronger during workout and at the same time you feel better even after the workout.

These machines have now become a mainstay amongst different cardiovascular exercise equipment.

Improve Your Bone Density - One o f the benefits of an elliptical trainer is that it assists in maintaining and improving your bone density as it helps you to perform weight bearing exercise.

It also i nhibits the onset of osteoporosis.

Achieve Time Efficiency - The dual action of its arms and legs helps in optimizing the energy expenditure as you will require lesser time to achieve more results with the help of an elliptical trainer.



Requires Low Maintenance - Lesser impact due to constant contact with the pedals means less wear and tear of an elliptical trainer as compared to other machines required for cardio workout.

Small Footprint - It does not take up your valuable floor space.



Accomplish Your Goals - You can accomplish a number of fitness goals with the help of an elliptical trainer. These include potential heart health as well as weight loss. Comfort is always important and it has been proven that if you enjoy exercise, then you'll surely continue to reap its benefits.

Elliptical t rainer helps you to quickly burn calories and as a result, it makes you feel that you have been on a brisk walk while providing the benefits of a great jogging session.

Make an adjustment for individual stride as well as pace for proper back alignment. A good elliptical trainer can be programmed for multiple users and at the same time it can easily be set up anywhere at home.



The fluid and low -impact motion of an elliptical trainer delays the onset of fatigue. This further allows you to train for a longer duration and also much more effectively. It helps in the strengthening of l egs, glutes as well as hips without putting any kind of unnecessary strain on your joints. The upper torso is in synchronized motion with the legs and results in toning of arms, shoulders, back and chest.



The following points will help you in making the right choice:

Consider your goals and also the goals of other members in your household before you begin your search. Most of the families have more than one potential exerciser that is likely to use the equipment. Due to this reason, It's very important to consider their needs and goals too. Runners are going benefit from its non-impact movement which will act as a complement to running. The older users are going to appreciate the ease of the motion along with fluidity offered by this equipment. Start shopping with a visit to an authorized fitness retailer. Remember to make a list of all the local retailers who are specialized in fitness equipment. These retailers will have higher quality equipment, educated staff and they can also help you to assemble your product and provide service in an effective manner. These dealers may also be associated with personal trainers who to help you in starting your program. When you go to a store, you must be prepared to test the elliptical trainer in a manner in which you are going to use it. Any unit will seem to be adequate if you test it just for 5 minutes but when you actually begin to put an elliptical trainer through its paces by using different programs, adjusting the ramp, or by exercising in forward as well as reverse motions that you will notice major differences in terms of quality and comfort. The best varieties of elliptical trainers will help in utilizing a variety of muscle groups which will further depend on angle and the direction of motion. Plan to wear comfortable exercise clothes along with walking or jogging shoes.

Must Have's in an Elliptical Trainer
Adjustable incline. Adjustment of ramp incline not only helps to vary your focus on different muscle groups but also helps to add variety to your routine. Only a few elliptical trainers offer this feature, but it's actually worth finding as the added variety can help in enhancing motivation and reducing boredom. You're unlikely to find this feature in case of an elliptical with upper-body motion but if you do, then you must be cautious as this feature may present safety concerns about balance during workout. Elliptical motion . This kind of motion helps in providing closest simulation to running and walking without the impact. A very important factor that you need to look for is the feel of motion. In case of some machines, you will feel a "kick" in their motion when your heel comes off the platform and obviously you don't wish to feel any kind of "bounce" or "kick" in your motion. Try to find an elliptical trainer that is capable of providing you with a true elliptical movement pattern in forward as well as backward directions. Is the movement smooth? This is actually critical question while trying an elliptical trainer. You can determine this by trying various types of units. Try to spend almost 20 minutes while exercising on a particular unit. There should not be any unusual stress on your hips or knees. Moreover, while using this unit, it should give you the ability to exercise in a neutral position. It means that there should not be a need to reach for the handrails or the need to bend over.

Natural pedal spacing - This feature helps in reducing stress on your knees, hips and back.

Upper body motion. Some elliptical trainers have upper body levers which help to add an element of upper body workout. In case you are not strength training, then this feature can help you to accomplish upper-body strengthening. Make sure that both upper and lower body motions are comfortable as well as intuitive. There should not be a need to compromise with your position. You must test different machines in order to find the one that is most comfortable. Forward and Reverse motions . An elliptical trainer's ability to move in forward and reverse motion helps to add variety as well as challenge to your workout. This helps to reduce the risk of any kind of repetitive use injuries. Most of the elliptical trainers have this feature. It must be noted that in case of an elliptical trainer, an adjustable ramp which is further combined with forward as well as reverse motions helps to vary the movement, muscle involvement along with intensity of workout in both the directions.

MP3 player input - This feature makes it easy for you to exercise to your favorite playlist.

Quiet operation. You must look and also listen for an elliptical trainer that feels smooth as well as quiet in operation. A well designed elliptical trainer is relatively silent at various intensity levels. Adjustable resistance . Good elliptical trainers will provide you with a wide range of resistance level that may be adjusted electronically. Try to look for a system which makes resistance changes intuitive and simple so that it may be possible to incorporate interval training sessions into your routine. Electronic Features. a number of elliptical trainers offer a spectrum of features in order to lure buyer. These features range from calories expended to the total amount of energy consumed. Consider not only what is important for you but also how you are going to use it. You can easily find more details about specific electronic features along with their advantages in motivation and programming. The secret is to look for those electronic features that are motivating as well as challenging. Try to look for an electronic package that has the possibility of growing with you with the passage of time and the one that can easily accommodate the needs of different users.

A quality cross trainer serves as a foundation for any home exercise room. It is flexible, quiet and space efficient at the same time. For a user who has an elliptical buying guide or a bike, it will prove to be a great addition and help to add variety as well as cross training elements. These will further enhance any sport as well as recreational activity.

Safety and Maintenance Look for safety features which include warm-up as well as cool-down periods, heart rate feedback and adjustable resistance. Make sure that the elliptical trainer is provided with handrails or console grips. These should be comfortable without being obtrusive at the same time. Make sure that you can exercise comfortably without hitting them. These should be ergonomically located as this will help you to use them at the time of starting or stopping. If you test in the store for considerable time, you will surely be able to choose wisely. The elliptical movement needs to be evaluated while considering the safety features. Avoid elliptical trainers with a "kick" in motion that may cause your heels to come off from the foot pedal while exercising and at the same time, you must avoid machines that may produce any kind of unusual stress or discomfort or on your knees and/or hips

Look for an elliptical trainer that is maintenance-free. Well-designed units take normal wear and tear into consideration, so you don't have to. As it is an electronic equipment, it will surely require service at some point of time with regular use. Most of the quality units offer a lifetime warranty on their frames.

Ask the salesperson about the components that are covered. Be sure that the warranty includes electronics as well as other key components of the elliptical trainer.

It is equally important to confirm that the dealer has his own service staff who have been trained and authorized to service the equipment. Programming and Motivation

Elapsed time, incline and stride are the basics of an elliptical trainer from fitness point of view. Having an indication of calories burned can be quite motivating. Consider all the additional information as well as features that will help to keep you motivated. Some of the useful and motivating features are: Heart Rate or HR interactivity - Measuring HR is a sure indicator of progress as well as intensity. Everyone should have a target heart rate (HR) range and you should always work within this range. Too high HR may result in an injury. Too low HR will not let you reach your goals. The best elliptical trainers are capable of adjusting your workout variables as they measure your heart rate in order to ensure that you will stay within the required range. In fact there are two categories of elliptical trainers. They are HR display vs HR interactive. HR interactive is the ideal because the machine is capable of making automatic adjustments in order to keep you at the desired HR level. You have to just punch in the desired heart rate and after that the machine will respond on its own throughout the workout. Custom and pre-set programs - The biggest reason why people quit a program is due to boredom. If you have a product that provides a myriad of programs, it will will help in keeping a program not only fresh but full of variety. Some elliptical trainers have an ability to customize a program according to your specific needs. This is obviously a great feature. Try to look for some research that is involved behind these programs. Custom Courses - The best cross trainers will "remember" all your favorite workouts and allow you to create your custom course. Such trainers have the ability to create and the ability store custom courses so that you may duplicate them again. Ease of Use - It has been found in the world of personal training that over the years, a number of clients are intimidated or frustrated with the number of buttons and features on electronic equipment. This becomes another obstacle against regular exercise. The best elliptical trainers keep it simple. A good elliptical should not take more than two to three steps for launching a program. Try to look for an elliptical trainer that offers a "quick start" or a manual mode. Such modes require only one or two pushes of a button and there you go. Variety - The secret of success in any exercise program is its consistency over the long haul. In case you can find a product that is capable of adding variety along with challenge to your routine, then you will surely stay motivated and quite obviously you will also be successful in reaching your goals. Try to look for features like adjustable ramp, adjustable resistance levels along with forward and reverse motions. Minor tweaks in these variables will help you in keeping your routine fresh as well as challenging.

If you These home based elliptical trainers ranges offer a superior total-body workout, which includes heart rate monitoring as well.