Volvo
This article is about Volvo Group - AB Volvo; VolvoCars is the passenger vehicle maker now owned by Ford MotorCompany, using the Volvo Trademark. AB Volvo Type Public (OMX: VOLV B) Founded 1927 by SKF Headquarters Gothenburg, Sweden Area served Worldwide Key people Finn Johnsson (Chairman of theboard), Leif Johansson (President and CEO) Industry Commercial vehicles Products Trucks, buses, constructionequipment, marine and industrial power systems, aerospacecomponents, financial services Revenue SEK 303,667 million(2008) Operating income SEK 15,851 million (2008) Profit SEK 9,942 million (2008) Total assets SEK 372,419 million(2008) Total equity SEK 84,640 million (2008) Employees 101,400 (2008) Website www.volvogroup.com INTRODUCTION
Swedish manufacturer, Volvo, is a supplier of commercialvehicles, as well as trucks, buses and construction equipment,propulsion systems for marine and industrial applications,aerospace components and financial services. Volvo was incorporatedin 1915 as a subsidiary of AB SKF, a Swedish ball bearingmanufacturer. The auto manufacturer was officially founded on 14April 1927, when the first car rolled off the production lineHisingen, Gothenburg. What a status symbol this was to become inthe future.

Volvo means "I drive" in modern-day English (or moreliterally, "I roll" in Latin). The name conjugated from "volvere"(cp the ball bearing producer SKF). The name Volvo was originallyregistered in May 1911 as a separate company within SKF AB and as aregistered trademark with the intention of being used for a specialseries of ball bearing. However, this idea was only used for ashort period of time and SKF decided to use "SKF" as the trademarkfor all its products. In 1924, Assar Gabrielsson, then SKF Sales Manager, andEngineer Gustav Larson, the two founders, started construction of aSwedish car. Their vision was to build cars that can withstand therigors of Sweden's rough roads and cold temperatures. This was tobecome a selling feature of Volvo products since day one. AB Volvo had no production work until 10 August 1926. This wasbecause of the year of preparation work consisting of tenproduction prototypes. These were set up to profile thecar-manufacturing business within the SKF group. Volvo AB wasintroduced at the Stockholm stock exchange in 1935. Then, SKFdecided to sell its shares in the company. Volvo was delisted from NASDAQ in June 2007, but remains listedon the Stockholm exchange. The Volvo V 4 was the first commercial car series produced inSweden. The first assembly model left the factory on 14 April 1927,which became the official date for the founding of the VolvoDynasty.
Sadly for some, Volvo sold off its car division in 1999. Fordpaid $6.45 billion for the priveledge. Since then, repeated rumoursin the media about Ford wanting to sell off Volvo Cars has provenunfounded. But, on 1 December 2008, Ford made the announcement thatit would "re-evaluate its strategic options for Volvo", includingthe possible sale of the marque. HISTORY
The Volvo Group had its origin in 1927 when thefirst Volvo car rolled off the production line at the factory in Gteborg. Only 297 cars were built that year. The first truck, theSeries 1, debuted in January 1928, was an immediate success andattracted attention outside the country. In 1930, Volvo sold 639cars, and the export of trucks to Europe started soon after; thecars did not become well-known outside Sweden until after World WarII. Marine engines have been part of the Volvo Group almost as longas trucks. Pentaverken, founded in 1907, was acquired in 1935. Asearly as 1929, however, the U-21 outboard engine was introduced.Manufacturing continued until 1962. The first bus, aptly-named B1, was launched in 1934, andaircraft engines were added to the growing range of products at thebeginning of the 1940s. In January 1999, Volvo Group sold its business area, Volvo CarCorporation, to Ford Motor Company for US$6.45 billion, with theresulting group now largely focussing on commercial vehicles. InJanuary 2001, Renault V. I. (including Mack Trucks, but not RenaultS. A.'s stake in Irisbus) was sold to Volvo, which renamed itRenault Trucks in 2002. As a result, the mother company Renault S.A. is AB Volvo's biggest shareholder, with a 20% stake, shares andvoting rights. The last ten years the company has undergone rapid growth inthe service area with, for example, financial solutions supportingthe sales of the manufacturing business units. In 2006, AB Volvoacquired 13% of Nissan Motor Co Limited. Japanese truckmanufacturer Nissan Diesel, became a major shareholder. In 2007 theVolvo Group fully privatized Nissan Diesel to support its expansionin the Asian region. TRADEMARK Volvo Trademark Holding AB is equally owned by AB Volvo andVolvo Car Corporation. Volvo Annual Report 1999. The main activity of the company is to own, maintain, protectand preserve the Volvo trademarks (including Volvo, the Volvodevice marks (Grille Slash & Iron Mark) Volvo Aero and VolvoPenta) on behalf of its owners and to license these rights to itsowners. The day-to-day work is focused upon maintaining the globalportfolio of trademark registrations and to extend sufficiently thescope of the registered protection for the VOLVO trademarks.

The main business is also to act againstunauthorised registration and use (incl counterfeiting) oftrademarks identical or similar to the VOLVO trademarks on a globalbasis.
The brand's promotional strategies include the sailing raceVolvo Ocean Race, formerly known as the Whitbread Around the WorldRace. Volvo likes to encourage its affluent image by sponsoringgolf tournaments all over the world including major championshipevents called the Volvo Masters and Volvo China Open. Volvo sponsored the Volvo Ocean Race, the world's leadinground-the-world yacht race for the first time in 2001 2002. Thecurrent edition of the race started on 27 June 2000 in Alicante,Spain. Volvo has also had a long-standing commitment to the ISAFand is involved in the Volvo/ISAF World Youth Sailing Championshipssince 1997. Volvo sponsors many polo matches in the town of Easthampton atthe arrival of the summer season. The prince of Saudi Arabia oftenattends matches with his world-class horses. Volvo Group also sponsored the Show Jumping World Cup from itsinception in 1979 until 1999. The company also sponsors culture, eg The G teborg Opera and The Gothenburg Symphony Orchestra.

GROUP COMPANIES Companies comprsing the Volvo Group are: Volvo Buses Volvo Construction Equipment VolvoCE Volvo Penta Volvo Aero Volvo Financial Services Volvo Trucks Renault Trucks Mack Nissan Diesel Motor Co VE Commercial Vehicles

BUSINESS UNITS A number of business units support the group companies, viz-a-viz: Volvo Technology Volvo Technology Transfer Volvo Business Services Volvo Treasury Volvo Group Real Estate VPCS which incorporates Volvo Action Service(Breakdown service) Volvo 3P Volvo Powertrain Volvo Parts Volvo Logistics Volvo Information Technology

GROUP BRANDS Volvo Mack Trucks Nissan Diesel Renault Trucks Prevost Car Nova Bus The Volvo brand, which has developed over decades, is one ofthe world's best known and respected brand names. Volvo Group'spurchase of Renault Trucks and Mack Trucks in 2001 created Europe'slargest and the world's second largest producer of heavy-dutytrucks with a broad product program. Mack is one of the most wellknown truck brands in North America while Renault Trucks holds aspecial position in Southern Europe. The Japanese Nissan Dieselmarketing a wide range of light, medium and heavy-duty vehicles aswell as buses and bus chassis, engines, vehicle components andspecial-purpose vehicles.

Prevost Car, owned by Volvo Bus Corporation, isthe leading North American manufacturer of premium touring coachesand bus shells for high-end motorhomes and specialty conversions.Nova Bus, part of Prevost, stands as a North American leader in thedesign, production and marketing of urban transitbuses.


Volvo Parts and VolvoAccessories Car folks are car folks,regardless of what make or model they drive. And if you like buying Volvo parts and Volvo accessories and working on your ownvehicle, you're a car person, like it or not. Join the club. We'dalso like to introduce ourselves as the premier place to findpremium-quality Volvo auto parts and Volvoaccessories at down to earth prices. We've spent a lot oftime ensuring that we carry the finest OE-spec replacement Volvo parts . Our Volvo parts meetall of the manufacturer's specifications to ensure your warranty ispreserved and your replacement Volvo parts fit and functioncorrectly. Insisting on this level of quality in our Volvo autoparts also ensures that we have happy customers who want toshop with us for all their Volvo parts needs.Of course, many Volvo auto parts don't fall into the OE-spec category,like aftermarket Volvo parts and Volvoaccessories . In these cases, we've researched the history andreliability of the manufacturer, and we only stock those Volvo car parts that we're sure will live up toour demanding requirements. So whether you're shopping forreplacement Volvo parts like brakes, oraftermarket Volvo parts like lowering springs, you'll find the Volvo auto parts you want at low prices that will surpriseyou. Just check our listings, find your Volvo carparts , and order with confidence today.