When planning a specialevent - be it a party, wedding, or any other memorable occasion -one of the most important considerations is the entertainment. Agood Disc Jockey can be one of the best ways to entertain yourguests. Selecting the right DJ can really make your event comealive too! DJs can also provide entertainment that will keep yourguests from leaving early, and get them up and moving, dancing,mingling, and having fun. You can also customize your event with music rangingfrom romantic ballads through big band and swin, to high-energydance music and virtually everything in between! But more than justmusic, a DJ is a Master of Ceremonies too, who will both entertain,and can keep the evening running smoothly. This includes makingformal announcements and introductions, not forgetting continuityas well. A professional DJ is well versed in the use ofstate-of-art sound equipment and spectacular lighting effects.Moreover, your DJ can also truly be the lifeand soul of the party.He can not only provide the entertainment, but also make sure thatyour event goes without a hitch. All in all, he's the perdon tomake your event one that will be remembered for years to come, andfor all the right reasons too. DJequipment usually consists of: A DJ mixer. This is an electronic, 2- or4-channel audio mixer with a crossfader used to smoothly gofrom one song to another, by using two or more playbackdevices Headphones. Used to listen to one recordingwhile the other recording is being played to the audience;and A microphone. This enables the DJ to announcesongs and address to the audience. Sound recordings in a DJ's preferred medium.Typically this would be vinylrecords , files from computer media or compactdiscs. Two devices combined - although this can bejust one - if playback is digital. This is used to play soundrecordings, and for alternating back and forth to create acontinuous playback of music. A portable audio system or PA system, orpossibly even a radio broadcasting system.

Of course, other equipment can beadded to the basic DJ setup described above, and for providingunique sound combinations. Such devices include, but are notlimited to: Special DJ digital controller hardware thatcan manipulate digital files on a PC or laptop; Samplers, sequencers, electronic musicalkeyboards (synthesizers), or drum machines. Electronic effects units (delay, reverb , octave, equalizer, chorus, etc.). Someclub DJs use a sub-harmonic synthesize which either doubles lowfrequencies with energy added an octave lower, or synthesizesharmonics in such a way that the impression of a very low basssound is added to the mix. A computerised performance system, which canbe used with vinyl emulation software to manipulate digital fileson the computer in real time. Multi-stylus headshells, which allow a DJ toplay different grooves of the same record, at the sametime.

Several techniques are employed byDJs as a means to better mix and blend recorded music. Thesetechniques primarily include cuing ,equalization, and audio mixing of two or more sound sources. Thecomplexity and frequency of special techniques depends largely onthe setting in which a DJ is working. Radio DJs are less likely tofocus on music-mixing procedures, than are Club DJs, who rely on asmooth transition between songs by using a range oftechniques.

Club DJ turntable-techniquesinclude beatmatching, phrasing, and slip-cueing to preserve energyon a dance floor. "Turntablism" embodies the art of cutting , beat juggling, scratching, needle dropping, phase shifting , back spinning, andeven more to perform the transitions and overdubs of samples in amore creative manner - although turntablism is often considered ause of the turntable as a musical instrument rather than a tool forblending recorded music too. Professional DJs may also use harmonicmixing, to choose songs that are in compatible music keys andscales.

Types of DJs


The selected music, the audience,the setting, the preferred medium, and the level of sophisticationof sound manipulation are all factors that differentiate thevarious DJ types. The role of selecting andplaying recorded music for anintended audience is the same for every disc jockeythough.


Radio Disc Jockeys

Radio DJs are often chosen fortheir personalities. A radio disc jockeyplays music that is broadcast across AM and FM bands, or worldwideon shortwave radio stations.


Famous American Radio Disc Jockeyssuch as Alan Freed, Scott Muni, Casey Kasem, Dick Biondi, WolfmanJack, and Dr. Demento built their audiences using a combination ofthe nature of the songs they selected, and their strong on-airskills. A modern-day commercial Radio Disc Jockey will typicallyrely on his or her on-air character alone, as the station'splaylist has been predetermined by a program director or musicdirector.

Radio Disc Jockeys appear in awide range of broadcast formats, from top 40 or contemporary hitradio to oldies and other formats that are defined by the type ofsongs played. Formats are defined by the type of originatingstation, with public radio ,college radio, and pirate radio as examples. Some nationalgovernments operate official radio stations for a global audience,such as Voice of America (hosted by the United States) and Voice ofRussia (organized by the Russian government). These stations mayinclude programs by disc jockeys. For example the clash frontmanJoe Strummer played selections from his musical library for theUK's BBC World Service in the 1990s. Large military units alsosometimes broadcast their own radio programs to their troops,inserting news, weather reports, and advice between popular songs.The film Good Morning, Vietnam portrays an American military discjockey.

Reggae Deejays

Here, the deejay is traditionallya vocalist who raps, toasts, orchats to a "riddim". The term "selector" is reserved for the personwho just selects the record and plays it over the soundsystem.

Club Disc Jockeys

Using several differentturntables, CD players, or a hard-drive source, a Club Disc Jockeyselects and plays music in a club setting as the name duggests. Thesetting can range from a neighborhood party or a small nightclub,to a discotheque, a rave, or even a stadium. The main focus of ClubDJs is on the music they play, and how they mix tracks in and out,sometimes just to add a bit of energy to a track. They build theirsets by choosing tracks to control the energy level of the crowd,and then use beatmixing and beatmatching techniques for seamlesstransitions between tracks.

Hip-hop Disc Jockeys (See also: Turntablism)

A hip-hop disc jockey is a DJ that selects andplays music as a hip-hop artist and/or performer, often backing upone or more MCs.

Mobile DiscJockeys


Mobile disc jockeys are anextension of the original radio disc jockeys. They travel with orgo on tour with mobile sound systems, and play from an extensivecollection of recorded content for a specific audience. Today,mobile DJs need a large selection of music, professional-gradeequipment, good organizational skills, vocal talent as an MC , mixing skills, qualitylighting, insurance for liability, and on-site backup equipment. Inthe 2000s the role of the mobile DJ has expanded. Many mobile DJshave assumed additional responsibilities to ensure an event'ssuccess. These responsibilities include the roles of MC, eventorganizer and coordinator, lighting director, and/or soundengineer.

In the past, Mobile DJs used vinylrecords or cassettes. During the disco era of the 1970s, demand formobile DJs (called "mobile discos" in the UK) soared, and top discjockeys travelled with hundreds of vinyl records and cassettetapes. In the 1990s, Compact Discs became the standard. Mobile discjockey, and trade publications such as DJ Times magazine and Mobile Beat were founded in this era.Mobile DJs have formed professional associations such as theCanadian Disc Jockey Association (CDJA), the Canadian Online Disc Jockey Association (CODJA), the American Disc Jockey Association (ADJA),and the National Association of Mobile Entertainers. In the UK,associations include the National Association ofDisc Jockeys (NADJ) and the South Eastern DiscothequeAssociation (SEDA).

These days, many mobile DJs relyheavily on laptop computers and MP3s for sequencing and mixing.This technology allows DJs to do mixing prior to an event, and alsolightens the load by reducing the number of CDs that a DJ mustcarry.

Timeline

19th century to the1920s

The first device to record soundwas invented i n 1857. Leon Scott invented the phonoautograph in France in 1877. CharlesCros then invented the phonograph in France- it was patented before Edison's invention but was never built. Thomas Alva Edison invented thephonograph cylinder, the first device to play back recorded soundin the United States. In 1892, Emile Berliner began commercialproduction of his gramophone records, the first disc records to beoffered to the public. In 1906, Reginald Fessenden transmitted thefirst audio radio broadcast in history also playing the firstrecord manufactures, that of a contralto singing Handel's Largo from Xerxes .

The world's first recognised radiodisc jockey was Ray Newby, of Stockton, California. In 1909, at 16years of age, Newby began regularly playing records on a small spark transmitter while a studentat Herrold College of Engineering and Wireless. This was located inSan Jose, California, under the authority of radio pioneer Charles"Doc" Herrold.

We used popular records at thattime, mainly Caruso records, because they were very good and loud;we needed a boost we started on an experimental basis and then,because this is novel, we stayed on schedule continually withoutleaving the air at any time from that time on, except for a veryshort time during World War I, when the government required us toremove the antenna Most of our programming was records, I'll admit,but of course we gave out news as we could obtain it Ray Newby,I've Got a Secret (1965)

By 1910, regular radiobroadcasting had started to use "live" as well as prerecordedsound. In the early radio age, content typically included comedy,drama, news, music, and sports reporting. The on-air announcers andprogrammers would later be known as disc jockeys. In the 1920s,juke joints became popular as places for dancing and drinking torecorded jukebox music. In 1927, Christopher Stone became the firstradio announcer and programmer in the United Kingdom, on the BBCradio station. In 1929, Thomas Edison ceased phonographic cylindermanufacture, ending the disc and cylinder rivalry.

1930s to 1950s

In 1935, American commentatorWalter Winchell coined the term "disc jockey" (the combination of"disc" (referring to the disc records) and "jockey" (which is anoperator of a machine) as a description of radio announcer MartinBlock, the first announcer to become a star. While his audience wasawaiting developments in the Lindbergh kidnapping, Block playedrecords and created the illusion that he was broadcasting from aballroom, with the nation s top dance bands performing live. Theshow, which he called Make Believe Ballroom, was an instant hit.The term "disc jockey" appeared in print in Variety in1941.

In 1943, Jimmy Savile launched theworld's first DJ dance party by playing jazz records in theupstairs function room of the Loyal Order of Ancient Shepherds inOtley, England. In 1947, he became the first DJ to use twinturntables for continuous play. Also in 1947, the Whiskey Go-Gonightclub opened in Paris, France ,considered to be the world's first discoteque, or disco (derivingits name from the French word meaning a nightclub, where thefeatured entertainment is recorded music rather than an on-stageband). Discos began appearing across Europe and the United States.From the late 1940s to early 1950s, the introduction of televisioneroded the popularity of radio's early format, causing it to takeon the general form it has today, with a strong focus on music,news, and sports.

In the 1950s, American radio DJswould appear live at "sock hops" and "platter parties" and assumethe role of human jukeboxes. They would usually play 45-rpmrecords, featuring hit singles on one turntable while talkingbetween songs. In some cases, a live drummer was hired to playbeats between songs to maintain the dance floor. In 1955, Bob Casey , a well-known "sock hop" DJ,introduced the first twin-turntable system for alternating back andforth between records, creating a continuous playback of music.Throughout the 1950s, payola payments by record companies to DJs inreturn for airplay were an ongoing problem. Part of the falloutfrom the payola scandal was tighter control of the music by stationmanagement. The Top 40 format emerged, where popular songs areplayed repeatedly.

In the late 1950s, sound systems , a new form of publicentertainment, were developed in the ghettos of Kingston, Jamaica.Promoters, who called themselves DJs, would throw large parties inthe streets that centered on the disc jockey, called the"selector," who played dance music from large, loud PA systems and bantered over the music with aboastful, rhythmic chanting style called "toasting." These partiesquickly became profitable for the promoters, who would selladmission, food, and alcohol, leading to fierce competition betweenDJs for the biggest sound systems and newest records.

1960s and 1970s

1968 witnessed the number of danceclubs starting to decline; most American clubs either closed orwere transformed into clubs featuring live bands. Neighborhoodblock parties that were modelled after Jamaican sound systemsgained popularity in Europe, and in the boroughs of NewYork.

Before that, in the mid-1960s,nightclubs and discotheques continued to grow in Europe and theUnited States. Specialized DJ equipment, such as Rudy Bozak'sclassic CMA-10-2DL mixer, began to appear on the market. In 1969,American club DJ Francis Grasso popularized beatmatching at NewYork's Sanctuary nightclub. Beatmatching is the technique ofcreating seamless transitions between records with matching beats,or tempos. Grasso also developed slip-cuing, the technique ofholding a record still while the turntable is revolving underneath,releasing it at the desired moment to create a sudden transitionfrom the previous record.

In the early part of the 1970s,the economic downturn led most of the dance clubs to change tounderground gay discos. In 1973, Jamaican-born DJ Kool Herc, widelyregarded as the "godfather of hip-hop culture," performed at blockparties in his Bronx neighborhood and developed a technique ofmixing back and forth between two identical records to extend therhythmic instrumental segment, or break. Turntablism, the art ofusing turntables not only to play music but to manipulate sound andcreate original music, was in its infancy.

1974 saw Technics release thefirst SL-1200 turntable, which evolved into the SL-1200 MK2 by1979. This remaied the industry standard for DJs through to themid-2000s. 1974 also saw German electronic music band Kraftwerkrelease the 22-minute song "Autobahn," which takes up the entirefirst side of that LP. Many years later, Kraftwerk would become asignificant influence on hip-hop artists such as Afrika Bambaataaand house music pioneer Frankie Knuckles. Hip-hop music and culturebegan to emerge d uring the mid-1970s,originating among Latins in NY City as well as with urban AfricanAmericans. The four main elements of hip-hop culture were MCing (rapping),graffiti, DJing, and of course breakdancing.

By the mid-1970s, the soul-funkblend of dance pop known as disco took off in the mainstream popcharts in Europe and the United States. This resulted indiscotheques experiencing a re-birth. However, unlike manylate-1960s clubs, which featured live bands, discotheques used theDJ's selection and mixing of records as the main entertainment. By1975, record libraries expanded, providing DJs access to recentreleases from the industry in an efficient manner.

In 1976, American DJ, editor, andproducer Walter Gibbons remixed "Ten Percent" by Double Exposure , one of the earliestcommercially released 12 singles (aka "maxi-single"). In 1977,hip-hop DJ Grand Wizard Theodore invented the scratching techniqueby accident. In 1979, the Sugar HillGang released "Rapper's Delight," the first hip-hop recordto become a hit. It was also the first real breakthrough forsampling, as the bassline of Chic's "Good Times" laid thefoundation for the song.

In 1977, Saratoga Springs, NY disc jockey Tom L. Lewisintroduced the Disco Bible (later renamed Disco Beats), whichpublished hit disco songs listed by beats per minute (tempo), aswell as by either artist or song title. Billboard ran an article onthe new publication, and it went national relatively quickly. Thelist made it easier for beginner DJs to learn how to createseamless transitions between songs, without dancers having tochange their rhythm on the dance floor.

The 1980s

In 1981, the cable televisionnetwork MTV was launched, originally devoted to music videos,especially popular rock music. The term " video jockey ," or VJ, was used to describe thefresh-faced youth who introduced the music videos. In 1982, thedemise of disco in the mainstream by the summer of 1982, forcedmany nightclubs to either close or change their entertainmentstyles - such as by providing MTV-style video dancing or livebands. Released in 1982, the song "Planet Rock" by DJ AfrikaBambaataa was the first hip-hop song to feature synthesizers. Thesong melted electronic hip-hop beats into the melodies fromKraftwerk's "Trans-Europe Express." In 1982, the Compact Discreached the public market in Asia, and early the following yearspread to other markets. This event is often seen as the "Big Bang"of the digital audio revolution.

In the early 1980s, NYC disco DJLarry Levan - known for his eclectic mixes - gained a cultfollowing, and the Paradise Garage, the nightclub at which he spun,became the prototype for the modern dance club where the music andthe DJ were showcased. Around the same time, the disco-influencedelectronic style of dance music called house music emerged inChicago. The name was derived from the WarehouseClub in Chicago, where resident DJ Frankie Knuckles mixedold disco classics and Eurosynth pop. House music is essentiallydisco music with electronic drum machine beats. The common elementof most house music is a 4/4 beat generated by a drum machine orother electronic means (such as a sampler), together with a solid(usually also electronically generated) synth bassline. In 1983,Jesse Saunders released what some consider the first house musictrack, "On & On." The mid-1980s also saw the emergence of New York Garage , a house musichybrid that was inspired by Levan's style, and sometimes eschewedthe accentuated high-hats of the Chicago house sound.

During the mid-1980s, techno music emerged from the Detroit clubscene. Being geographically located between Chicago and New York,Detroit techno artists combined elements of Chicago house and NewYork garage along with European imports. Techno distanced itselffrom disco's roots by becoming almost purely electronic withsynthesized beats. In 1985, the Winter Music Conference started in Fort Lauderdale Florida, andbecame the premier electronic music conference for dance music discjockeys.

In 1985, TRAX Dance Music Guidewas launched by American Record Pool inBeverly Hills. It was the first national DJ-published musicmagazine, created on the Macintosh computer using extensive musicmarket research, and early desktop publishing tools. In 1986, "WalkThis Way," a rap / rock collaboration by Run DMC and Aerosmith, became the firsthip-hop song to reach the Top 10 on the Billboard Hot 100. Thissong was the first exposure of hip-hop music (as well as theconcept of the disc jockey as band member and artist) to manymainstream audiences. In 1988, DJ Times magazine was firstpublished. It was the first US-based magazine specifically gearedtoward the professional mobile and club DJ.

Starting in the mid-1980s, thewedding and banquet business changed dramatically with theintroduction of DJ music, replacing the bands that had hithertobeen the norm. Bandleaders, like Jerry Perell and others, startedDJ companies, such as NY Rhythm DJ Entertainers. Using theirknowledge of audience participation, MC charisma, and"crowd-pleasing" repertory selection, the wedding music industrybecame almost all DJ, while combining the class and elegance of thetraditional band presentation. New DJs as well as bandleaders withyears of experience and professionalism transformed the entireindustry. Now, everyone loves a good banquet DJ. The latest trendis to combine real musicians with DJ music for a more personal andartistic approach.

1990s through 2000s

In the early 1990s, the rave scenemodelled itself on the acid house scene.Some DJs, wanting to be the only source for hearing certain tunes,used "white labels" - records with no information printed on thelabels. This was to prevent other trainspotters from learning andcopying what they were spinning. The rave scene changed dancemusic, the image of DJs, and the nature of promoting. Theinnovative marketing surrounding the rave scene also created thefirst superstar DJs, who established marketable "brands" aroundtheir names and the sounds they played. A number of these celebrityDJs toured around the world, and were able to branch out into othercultures and their music-related preferences.

Also in the early 1990s, theCompact Disc overtook the gramophone record in popularity. However,gramophone records continued in production, although in verylimited volumes, well into the 21st century, particularly for clubDJs and for local acts recording on small regional labels. Come themid-1990s, trance music, having run rampant in the Germanunderground for several years, appeared as a major force in dancemusic throughout Europe, including the UK. It became one of theworld's most dominant forms of dance music by the end of the 1990s,thanks to a departure from its repetitive, hypnotic roots, towardscommercialized song structure.

In 1991, Mobile Beat magazine,geared specifically toward mobile DJs began publishing. In 1992, MPEG, which stands for the MovingPicture Experts Group, released The MPEG-1 standard, designed toproduce reasonable sound at low bit rates. The lossy compressionscheme MPEG-1 Layer-3, popularly known as MP3, later revolutionizedthe digital music domain. In 1993, the first internet "radiostation", Internet Talk Radio, was developed by Carl Malamud.Because the audio was relayed over the internet, it was possible toaccess internet radio stations from anywhere in the world. Thismade it a popular service for both amateur and professional discjockeys operating from their personal computers.

By 1995, the first full-time,internet-only radio station, Radio HK, began broadcasting the musicof independent bands. In 1996, Mobile Beat had its first nationalmobile DJ convention in Las Vegas. During the late 1990s. Bandssuch as Nu Metal, and Korn, Limp Bizkit, and Linkin Park peaked intheir popularity. The new subgenre of alternative rock bore someresemblence from hip-hop, because rhythmic innovation andsyncopation are primary, often featuring DJs as band members.Moreover, during the late 1990s, a number of DJ and VJ softwareprograms were marketed, resulting in PC users being able to deejayor veejay using their personal music or video files. Quite someinnovation!


Fast forward to 1998, and thefirst MP3 digital audio player was released, the Eiger Labs MPManF10. Final Scratch debuted at the BE Developer Conference, markingthe first digital DJ system to allow DJs control of MP3 filesthrough special time coded vinyl records or CDs. While it would take some time for this novel concept tocatch on with the "die hard Vinyl DJs", this would soon become thefirst step in the new Digital DJ revolution. Manufacturers teamedwith computer DJing pioneers to offer professional endorsements,the first being Professor Jam, who went on to develop theindustry's first dedicated computer DJ convention and learningprogram, the "CPS (Computerized Performance System) DJ Summit", tohelp spread the word about the advantages of this emergingtechnology. This meant that DJs couldapply for licenses giving them the right to "burn" their owncompilation CDs of "usable tracks", instead of having to cart theirwhole CD collections around to their gigs. In 1999, Shawn Fanning released Napster, the first of themassively popular peer-to-peer file sharing systems. During thisperiod, the AVLA (Audio Video Licensing Agency) of Canada announcedan MP3 DJing license, administered by the Canadian RecordingIndustry Association.


With the arrival of the newMillenium, new technologies such as voicetracking allowed single DJs to send announcements acrossmany different stations. Commercial radio DJs were increasinglylimited in their freedom to select which songs to play. Some musicaficionados sought free-form stations that put the DJs back intocontrol, or chose instead to listen to satellite radio services orportable music players instead. However college radio stations andother public radio outletscontinued to be the most common places for freeform play lists inthe U.S.

Apple Computer's iPod wasintroduced in 2001, and rapidly became the highest selling brand ofportable digital mp3 audio players. The convenience and popularityof the iPod spawned a new type of DJ, namely: the "MP3J". Firstappearing in London's East End Clubs, it quickly spread to othermusic scenes, including New York City. This new DJ phenomonaallowed the average music fan to bring two iPods to an "iPodNight", plug into the mixer, and program a play list without theskill and equipment demanded by a more traditional DJ setup. Therewas also no need to carry around a heavy case of CDs.

In 2004 Rane introduced its ownversion of the digital vinyl DJ system Serato Scratch Live, making improvements inoverall system stability and more closely emulating the feel oftrue vinyl. They brought out a hardware mixer version in 2006. Soonafterward, many nightclub deejays that had remained true vinylrecord aficionados began the transition to becoming digital vinylusers. In 2006, the concept of DJ had its 100-yearanniversary.

In the late 2000s, topless femaleDJs have appeared in special nightclubs. This new gimmick began inFinland and Russia.