The originalStarbucks was opened in Pike Place Market in Seattle, Washington,in 1971 by three partners: English teacher Jerry Baldwin, historyteacher Zev Siegel, and writer Gordon Bowker. The three wereinspired by Alfred Peet, whom they knew personally, to open theirfirst store in Pike Place Market to sell high-quality coffee beansand equipment. The original Starbucks location was at 2000 WesternAvenue from 1971 1976. That store then moved to 1912 Pike Place; itis still open. During their first year of operation, they purchasedgreen coffee beans from Peet's, then began buying directly fromgrowers.


But it's the not as simple as that.The company is named in part after Starbuck, Captain Ahab's firstmate in the book Moby-Dick, as well as a turn-of-the-century miningcamp (Starbo or Storbo) on Mount Rainier. According to HowardSchultz's book Pour Your Heart Into It: How Starbucks Built aCompany One Cup at a Time, the name of the company was derived fromMoby-Dick, although not in as direct a fashion as many assume.Gordon Bowker liked the name "Pequod" (the ship in the novel), buthis then creative partner Terry Heckler responded, "No one's goingto drink a cup of Pee-quod!" Heckler suggested "Starbo".Brainstorming with these two ideas resulted in the company beingnamed for the Pequod's first mate, Starbuck.
The logo is an image of a "twin-tailed siren"(the siren of Greek mythology). The logo has been significantlystreamlined over the years. In the first version, which gave theimpression of an authentic 15th century European woodcut, theStarbucks siren was topless and had a fully visible double fishtail. The image also had a rough visual texture. In the secondversion, which was used from 1987-92, her breasts were covered byher flowing hair, but her navel was still visible, and the fishtail was cropped slightly. In the current version, used since 1992,her navel and breasts are not visible at all, and only vestigesremain of the fish tails. The original "woodcut" logo can still beseen on the Starbucks store in Seattle's Pike Place Market, and onboth the House Blend and Decaf House Blendpackaging.


He advised that the company shouldsell coffee and espresso drinks as well as beans. The ownersrejected this idea, believing that getting into the beveragebusiness would distract the company from its primary focus. Tothem, coffee was something to be prepared in the home. Certain thatthere was much money to be made selling drinks to on-the-goAmericans, Schultz started the Il Giornale coffee bar chain in1985.

In 1984, the original owners of Starbucks, ledby Baldwin, took the opportunity to purchase Peet's (Baldwin stillworks there today). In 1987, they sold the Starbucks chain toSchultz's Il Giornale, which rebranded the Il Giornale outlets asStarbucks and quickly began to expand. Starbucks opened its firstlocations outside Seattle at Waterfront Station in Vancouver,British Columbia, and Chicago, Illinois, that same year. At thetime of its initial public offering on the stock market in 1992,Starbucks had grown to 165 outlets.

Gordon Bowker is anAmerican entrepreneur. He began as a writer and went on to co-foundStarbucks. He was later a co-owner of Peet's Coffee & Tea andRedhook Ale Brewery. He attended The University of SanFrancisco.
