Before Having Your First Appraisal

When you decide to sell a property, always be patient and careful in deciding who's going to sell it. There are appraisal agencies that will try to let you let them sell your property by giving you a high price than what your property can actually be sold for leading to a very long selling progress with few results.

Every property is not in the same place, doesn't have the same light as any other, so the exact value can never be known and the same. Anyone can make an estimation, which is why everyone has different opinions. We often hear the question "How much is a property like this one worth?", and the answer is that every property is unique. Factors that Contribute to the Market Value
The state of the facade, entrance door, common areas of the building, staircases, gardens, etc. Direction the property faces inside the building The distribution of the rooms, etc., inside the residence Number of Room The quality of the construction's materials used
The condition of the floors, kitchen, walls, and ceilings Heat and water, individual or general services Built-in closets Property orientation
If it gets sunlight all day or only for a limited number of hours and the view


It seems easy, yet in order to get a good appraisal you need to keep a number things in mind, such as the offer and demand situation, and knowing the tendencies and news of the market.

Appraisals and Confidentiality

An Appraisal is said to be a personalized service because you'll receive a visit at your own property and can be able to make questions about what the surveyor says and ask explanations about the "why's" of certain subjects that influence the property value or what concerns you.


So for your security, you should be guaranteed complete confidentiality. The surveyor will then promise not to share the estimated value with anyone until a sales permit has been signed, and only after which that the sale price needs to be exposed to potential buyers. Ask for Written Ev aluations

You can also ask for a written evaluation that, for a minimal cost, leaves you a written report that might be convenient for: Resolving family issues
Being accepted guarantees from commercial rentals or loans Deciding to buy Evaluating investment projects
If you want to, although this adds for an additional cost, you can ask for a report of credit risk, plus a list of possible sale's inhibitions.

Ask us for the documentation

Like other transaction, it is very useful to have the following documents available at the time of the visit to show the surveyor, who will then write down some necessary facts to correctly appraise your property . The documents will never be removed from your house, and always remain in your possession in original or photocopied. The Title of the Property The Floor Plan The last property tax bill
Subdivided properties
Last 3 expense payments





You will then be informed of the competitive sales value at which the property can be quickly sold after they evaluated the mentioned considerations. From the surveyor, you will also receive information about the realty market trends at the time and the reasons why your property has the value that it does.




Whatever reasons you have to order a property appraisal, always bear in mind to seek first advices from professionals, experienced people. Sometimes a hasty decision will bring you regrets at the end.


