An exercise machine is any machine used in exercise . These range from simple spring-like devices to computerized electromechanical rides to recirculating-stream swimming pools. An ergometer is an apparatus for measuring the work performed by exercising (or an exercise machine equipped with such an apparatus) as used in training or cardiac stress tests or other medical tests.

An elliptical trainer (also cross trainer or simply elliptical ) is a stationary exercise machine used to simulate walking or running without causing excessive pressure to the joints, hence decreasing the risk of impact injuries.

Generally it contains two tracks upon which the user stands; when he or she moves his or her legs, they describe an elliptical motion (hence the machine name). Some ellipticals have magnetic resistance controls that add difficulty to doing the motion. These are relatively new additions to cardiovascular fitness equipment. There are three types of elliptical trainers, categorized by the motor or "drive" location.

the oldest elliptical design Manufacturers: Life Fitness Precor the latest design technology Manufacturer: Quantum Fitness

They can be self-powered by user-generated motion or need to be plugged in for adjustment of motion and/or for supplying their electronic consoles and resistance systems. On some models, the incline of sloping roller ramps beneath the pedal-links can be adjusted to produce varying pedal motion paths. The result of such adjustment changes the burdens on various muscle groups in the legs. Some mechatronic models can vary both the incline, resistance and stride length over the course of a workout according to a preset program. Some trainers can be driven in a reverse as well as in a forward direction. Elliptical trainers are primarily driven via the legs, and most are combination designs having handle-levers attached to each pedal-link for the purpose of enabling a burden on the arms to provide a secondary source of driving power. The user grips the handles below shoulder height and pushes/pulls them while shuffling the feet back and forth within their elliptically shaped paths. Thus the oscillating handle motions are dependently coordinated with the constrained pedal motions. Poorly designed machines are too dependent on the user's leg power, producing excessive handle speeds as a result of mechanical ratios that do not provide enough advantage to the handle-levers. Consequently such machines feel to the user as if his or her arms are simply going along for the ride, rather than sharing in the work. The better models offer a harmonious combination of arm and leg exercise in the correct ratios.


An elliptical cross trainer is comparable to a treadmill in its exertion of leg muscles and the heart. Ellipticals produce an intermediate range of leg motion between that of stationary bikes and treadmills.

There are claims that the dual action exercise of an elliptical trainer can actually be more efficient in burning calories. It is also suggested that the perceived rate of exertion is lower. However, other studies have shown that the rate in which calories are burned on an elliptical trainer is similar to that on a treadmill.

Thomas Altena, a professor of nutritional and exercise physiologist of the University of Missouri-Columbia measured oxygen retention, lactic acid build-up, heart rate, and perceived rate of exertion to compare treadmills and elliptical trainers. According to Altena, the "physiological responses associated with elliptical exercise were nearly identical to treadmill exercise". Regardless, elliptical trainers are growing in popularity. One reason may be that because the person who is exercising is not taking his or her feet off of the pedals, and exercise can be done at a gentler rate, still getting the same degree of results as with a treadmill. Also, at home, especially in an apartment setting, they are said not to make as much noise as a treadmill may make for one's downstairs neighbours.

An elliptical trainer is designed to provide a cardiovascular workout rather than build muscles It offers a non-impact cardiovascular workout that can vary from light to high intensity based on the resistance preference set by the user.

Most elliptical trainers work the user's upper and lower body (although some models do not have moving upper body components). Though elliptical trainers are considered to be minimal-impact, they are an example of a weight-bearing form of exercise. A recent study by the University of Idaho shows that varying the stride length on the elliptical trainer can recruit a larger variety of muscle groups. The study also showed that as the stride is lengthened, more calories are burned without any higher rate of perceived exertion by the user. While gripping the handrails in a smooth controlled motion, the user should stride either forward or reverse, working through a full natural range of movement smoothly and continuously. This study lends credibility to the claims made about the adjustable stride length feature on some newer ellipticals.

The user should adopt a comfortable standing position with his or her spine in a neutral position (with a straight back). The knees, hips and ankles should be kept in alignment. Weight should be distributed between the heels and the balls of the feet. Watch out for models that move across the floor while you are working out dangerous! And whenever possible, try before you buy. That way you will know if the machine is comfortable for you to use.


Some manufacturers produce commercial models, which focus on durability and are made to withstand the more frequent use of the fitness club environment. These units typically sell for well over $4,000 (US), offering greater durability and programming than the typical home user would ever need. There are also models available for use in one's home. These can be purchased at a more reasonable price, with some machines starting at under $500 (US).