POKER RULES

Although poker game has many variations, all of them have the same basic rules. Basic rules All variations of poker games use 52 cards as a standard deck.
The cards are ranked as : Ace, King, Queen, Jack, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, A. Having Ace as the highest and the lowest card. There is no value difference in any of the card's suit: Diamonds, Hearts, Spades, Clubs. The goal of the game is for the player to have the best hand of cards. Winning hands are determined through the rank of poker hands. If there are two players who have the same hand (let's say both players have Royal Flush), the player with the highest card is the winner.
It does not matter of which suit as long as all cards are of the same suit. For example:
2 of Diamonds 5 of Diamonds 6 of Diamonds Jack of Diamonds Ace of Diamonds COMMON POKER TERMS

Before learning how to play poker, it is better to know the different poker terms, for these will give you an edge to be a better player. It's like playing any sports. Before you become good at it, you should know the basics first. The better you know about a game, the better you can play and win at it.

All-in Betting all the chips or cash left in front of you on the table. This happens when you don't have enough money to cover the full bet amount, so you then place your remaining money into the pot. In that case, what you'll win is proportional to what you just contributed.
Ante - The minimum bet that each player must place into the pot before the betting begins and before any cards are dealt. Add-on - An option to buy more chips than a player received with his original buy-in. There is usually one option to 'add-on' during a tournament, it's either at the end of the rebuy period or at the first break Big Blind - This is a forced bet . The first bet posted by the player to the left of the player who posts the small blind. The big blind bet amount is equal to the lower bet. For example, in a $10 - $20 game, the big blind is $10. Big Pair - A Pair with a value of 10 or greater. Blind Bet - The first bet by each player placed before any cards are dealt. It is considered a live bet for the first round of betting, wherein you'll have big and small blind bets. Note: This is applicable to Texas Hold'em , Omaha, Omaha Hi-lo. Bring-in - A mandatory bet by the layer with the lowest card in the Third Street, the first round of betting in Seven-Card Stud Poker.
Buy-in Amount - The amount a player must bring into a game. Call - This is when you place a bet that is equal to the previous bet. Cap - The limit that is used to describe the third raise in a round.
Check - This is when you want to stay in the game without placing a bet. You can only do this if there's no other bets have been placed in the betting round. Community Cards - These are the cards on the table that are dealt by the players to complete a five-card hand. Dealer-button - This is a flat disk used in signifying the Dealer's table's position, which is marked with a D. Equalized - When all the players have placed the same credits to the pot. Fifth Street - This is the third round of betting in a Seven-Card Stud Poker . It is called Fifth Street because each player has Five-Cards. Flop - The first three community cards dealt to the table. Fold - This is when the players throw in their cards. By doing so,they give up any claim on the pot in exchange for not contributing more money to it. Fourth Street - This is the 2nd round of betting in a Seven-Card Stud Poker . It is called Fourth Street because each player has four cards. The following applies to the Fourth Street: The player with the highest ranking hand starts the next round of betting. He/she can Call, Fold, Raise or Check. Live Blinds - These are blind bets that are in play. Lowest Card - As the name itself, this is the card with the lowest value. Aces are high. If two Players have the same lowest card, the value is determined by suit. Suits are arranged in alphabetical order from lowest to highest value - Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts, and Spades. Muck - This is when you don't want to show your losing hand to the table. Pocket Cards - The cards are dealt face down to each player.
Pot - The chip's pile that accumulate as each player antes, bets and raises. All winnings are paid from the pot. The value of the pot varies depending on the stakes involved and the amount the players bet. The pot goes to the winner of the hands in each round. Quartered - This is for Omaha Hi-Lo Poker. When the players tie with either a high or a low hand and earn a quarter of the pot. Raise - When you match your previous bet then increase your bet, wherein it increases the stakes for the remaining players. River Card - Showdown - This occurs after the last betting round, and is when the remaining players compare hands to determine the winner. The player with the highest value hand wins the pot. Sitting Out - This is when you choose to leave a table for a few hands. Small Blind - This is the first bet a player posted to the Dealer's left. It is a forced bet. The small blind bet amount is equal to half of the lower bet.
Street - Note: This is applicable to Seven-Card Stud Poker.
Refers to the various stages of betting. Betting starts on the Third Street continuing to the Seventh Street. This is five rounds of betting. Third Street - This is the first round of betting and is called Third Street because the Players have three cards each. The Player with the lowest card displayed brings-in the betting in this round. Note: This is applicable to Seven-Card Stud Poker.
Visible Cards - These are cards dealt face up to each player, which they can use to complete a five-card combination.
