8670 West State Road, 56 French Lick, Indianapolis, 47432.

you really ought to visit it along the way. That's because the i mmense passageways and huge caverns have fascinated visitors for over 150 years (and why the caves have been a National Natural Landmark since 1972). - nicknamed "The Johnny Appleseed of American Golf", and who was a prolific Scottish American golf course architect during the first half of the twentieth century being credited with having designed some 600 courses in a 35-year span - The Hoosier National Forest in which Salt Lick Resort and Casino finds itself is the largest wildness area in all of Indiana at over 200,000 acres. However (as is the often the case with State Forests, it is actually an un-contiguous series of scattered land parcels all over the southern half of Indiana that spreads out from Bloomington (a destination city with a fine university in itself).


Hoosier has been labelled "multiple use" which means that hunting is allowed as well as hiking, horse-riding and mountain biking. While purists may not like the idea the rangers generally do. Their park must remain relevant to the greater public if it is to survive the worst depredations of commercial civilization. There are limitations though. Off-road vehicles are prohibited. Be aware of the restricted hunting seasons in most areas. Goal-directed law enforcement is alive and well in Hoosier! You can purchase a general map of the National Forest at most outdoor gear stores (or from the Forest Service offices in Bedford if you plan ahead). Use this as an indication of areas you might find interesting. After you narrow down your search, $6 buys you a topographical map from the Department of Natural Resources in Indianapolis (or the Forest Service Offices here as may suit you best). Hoosier Nations Forest is a dynamic wonderland that already boasted over 240 miles of maintained trails back in 2003. Patrons benefit from established camping grounds, most of which lead directly to trails through nearby woods. Please avoid the urge to camp anywhere in the forest where temporary restrictions are in force though. These are all there for good reasons, and everybody benefits when we all comply.

Alan McPherson's "Nature Walks in Southern Indiana" is a still great introduction to specific destinations within the Hoosier National Forest (although some may find him a tad dry). We recommend you go get it if you haven't already done so. You'll find it crammed with unusually good directions for every spot that is worth visiting. Although it will lead you past hollows and ridges, waterfalls, lakes and creeks and meadows, caves and knobs and so on, the best of all Hoosier scenery is found deep in the forests themselves.


The Charles Deam Wilderness section ( is the only genuine wilderness (or close to one) anywhere in Indiana, comprising as it does 13,000 acres of genuinely contiguous Forest Service land. It stretches from the south bank of the eastern half of Lake Monroe all the way southeast of Bloomington down to the SR 446 trunk road.


To get there, follow Tower Ridge Road from SR 446 deep into the heart of the wilderness area. Grab a parking space and lose yourself for a few days in this land of flat-topped ridges, geode-laden streambeds, and occasional caves. You'll see plentiful squirrels, deer, and other game. Your only other companions will be h ikers, backpackers, and horseback riders (and hunters every fall), all drawn to the wilderness and its thirty-nine miles of trails.


Pioneer Mothers Memorial Forest a few miles south of Paoli on SR 37 is also worth a visit. Look for a parking area on the northeast ( left) side of the road as you drive along a curve that starts out going south, heads back north, and then heads generally south again.


Philosopher and naturist John Birkett describes this magic place with words like ....the most impressive stand of Black Walnut anywhere I've been .... I couldn't think of a better description, and .... walnut cathedral. Perhaps that was when he first laid eyes on the half dozen or more trees growing right out of a ravine with sixty foot of trunks before the first branch! Stay away veneer industry. These treasures belong to all of us. Not just you! Special Precautions


We'd like you to return again and again. That's why we mention that can be c ommon throughout the summer. All the Indiana poisonous snakes are found here too, thankfully with the exception of the feared massasauga rattler. The ones we do have include the timber rattler (very rare and also known as Bluff Rattler, Ol' Velvet Tail, or Timber Rattlesnake), the copperhead (a commoner and remarkably bad-tempered beastie that ) and the cottonmouth (not to be confused with the water moccasin with a similar nickname) that we sometimes still see in the extreme southern sections.


The extensive forests in Perry County have an infestation of the lyme disease-bearing lone star tick. Follow normal precautions if exploring our extensive cave, lake and river systems that you'll find everywhere throughout the forests. Tell people where you're going, and when to start worring if you don't contact them again. Take good maps with you, and a compass. Even if you don't know about map finding, you can always use it to keep heading in the same direction if you become lost. Be aware that there are no reliable water supplies in the back country, and that we cannot guarantee that all are safe. Take along a good quality filter (plus a spare) with you, or be prepared to boil whatever you can lay your hands on (don't forget the lighter!).
Finally, don't forget to consider other hikers, and to be sure to stop by at Forest Service offices when you see one. They love what they are doing but a little appreciation can make a deal of difference!
