Contents :

Introduction

Before Choosing to Adopt

Pet Rescue (The Adoption Process)

The Fun Begins

Natural Dog Foods

Something to Smile About

Dear Daisy Dog (letter)

Issues of Dog Ownership

Canine Dental Care

Brief Conclusion

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Introduction - Since the Dawn of Time

Dogs and humans have enjoyed a close association since mankind first set foot in his cave. Quite unlike any other animal, the canine has crawled its way into our lives. Maybe it was the sight of one of our ancestors dragging the "kill" into the cave that got the dog species thinking "good place to be"? Perhaps man used his early dog to assist in hunting, you know, kinda like an early hunting dog? Nobody will ever know for sure, because whatever it was that kindled that first meeting, nothing is going to stop this cosy arrangement anytime soon!

As for the dog being subservient, and man's best friend at the same time - well that rumor seems to have started out with Felix, that jealous feline who didn't like the relationship he saw developing because he had ideas of his own! He's not really as smart as he would have us believe, because if he were, Felix would be the one chasing the dog and not the other way around...Mind you, Felix was smiling like the proverbial Cheshire Cat when the Russians put the first dog into space (without man!).

Enjoy the following article as we mix a little mirth with some cold-hard facts while finding out more about a furry friends.

Not wanting to come across as "sexist" to our canine friends, " him " in this article refers to either gender - there, there pretty Pooch!

Before Choosing to Adopt

There are some people around that warn against adopting someone else's dog. Since you don't know it's background, and it certainly can't tell you all its secrets, taking a dog over comes with certain risks. Personally, I think there are arguments for and against adoption. Firstly, it's a lot cheaper than buying a recognized bread, then, you can see its present condition at a glance. Time spent with a dog you are considering will tell you straight up if it's going to work. Dogs are incredibly astute, so if they don't like you, you'll be the first to know. And you need to recognize this too, because it's going to be a struggle trying to win over a canine that hasn't taken to you at the first meeting.

The other point is that many dogs are put up for adoption for good reasons, so to discriminate against a rescue dog in favor of a total unknown is not really fair. Most rescue dogs will likely have been house-trained, whereas you newly-bread pedigree has to go the whole nine yards still (and he will, literally).

I recall a fine young (+/- 2 years old) dog that I seemed to click with immediately at my local animal rescue place. He was very unhappy, having just recently been put up for adoption. Moreover, the policy of the rescue place was to neuter all male dogs brought in, and spay the bitches - pretty sensible in most instances. I ended up taking this fine specimen, but I very nearly soon returned him a couple of times. Problem one - he was still showing signs of aggression even though his hormonal balance had now altered drastically. Problem two? His previous owner!

The first I knew about the second problem was when I walked my dog on a secluded beach close to home. Everything was fine at first and I soon let him off his leash. A figure appeared some distance away and was moving towards us. I soon spotted that it was an elderly woman out walking alone with a walking stick - Poochy was watching too, but he had other motives. As soon as the lady was close enough, my dog was speeding over her way. He attacked her without any provocation, and it was all I could do to stop any serious injury. Remember, that my dog was new to me and was not yet groomed properly, including obeying my commands! Fortunately, the lady out walking had terrific presence of mind - she stood still and let the excitement die down - she also cast her stick away, which my dog went off in pursuit of. Being a dog-lover, the woman said she was fine, if somewhat shaken. She also asked about my dog, and when she heard my story she immediately realized that my rescue dog was owned by an elderly woman with a stick, and that the stick was probably used to punish my dog!

I returned to the rescue place and they confirmed my worst nightmare. The previous owner was 85 years old and quickly found that her new puppy was too much for her and she could not control him.Her walking stick was the only solution, and the dog soon came to resent this weapon of war!

However, the story ended well. I kept my new pooch and we both booked into our local Sunday morning dog school for correctional training. This is a must for all new dogs and their principal owners!

My true story illustrates what can go wrong in an adoption situation, but it is also worth remembering that with will power and determination, you can see all things through. One thing I quickly learned was that with a new dog, you have to show him you are the boss - if you don't, he assumes that HE is and that equals a whole heap of trouble. Some call it the pack instinct and the pecking order!
The Fun Begins

Let's assume that you've made your choice and you are now the proud owner of a new dog. This is where the fun begins. Let's first talk about feeding your dog. All dogs need food to survive, and in the modern world they depend totally on their owner. Since dogs can't talk, you are going to need to watch their water bowls too - I have yet to meet the dog that decides for itself that it's time to replenish its own water bowl!

When it comes to diet, you must provide a balanced one at regular feeding times. Breakfast and dinner I say, but nothing in between except " good boy! " rewards. Strictly no snacking and definitely no table scraps - human food is not generally suitable for dogs.

The third element to a dogs requirements is regular exercise, and you can do this by walking your canine chum after you've trained him properly.

That just leaves LOVE! You can never give your dog enough love, and he will return in good measure too - unconditionally!

After that, all your dog needs is a warm, dry place to sleep, somewhere close to you where he can keep a watchful eye open for you.

A man arrived at the Vet in a panic. "Doctor, I think my dog is dead", he said anxiously.
After a moment of observation, the Vet told him to put the dog on the operating table and then disappeared. Eventually, the Vet returned together with a big black cat. He placed the cat on the table and told it to "get on with it then." The cat then sniffed the dogs ears, his nose and all about him, and finished off by walking, somewhat confidently, all over the pooch. The Vet retorted, "Yep, your dog is definitely dead! That will be $500 and $35 dollars." Somewhat flummoxed, the man repeated, "$500 and $35 dollars? What on earth for?" The Vet said, "$35 for my time, and the $500s for the cat scan. " Brief Conclusion

Having read this article, hopefully you'll be more aware of the tasks and responsibilities of dog ownership. It's not just about adoption, that's the easy part. It's about constant care and love. One thing you can be certain about and that is that the love will be returned by your dog a thousand-times plus!

Your new member of the household will soon work his way into the hearts of each family member. If you treat him right, he may even become the center of attraction!

Now go and do your duty and ADOPT A DOG!