The Sony Playstation 2: Games anddevelopment
The playstation 2 was one of thefirst games consoles to become popular within the mainstream ofsociety. I believe that up until the playstation and theplaystation 2 gaming consoles were considered as expensiveunattainable pieces of equipment for the average household. Througha lowering of prices and a greater availability of game shopsconsoles have become pretty much a household item. Thereforecreating games has become big business with l

Where to Buy Playstation 2games



Due to the age of this console the games are for the most partbecoming cheaper and cheaper. This doesn't say anything for theamount of enjoyment that can be gained from them. Although not asgraphically superior as modern consoles Playstation 2 games can bejust as fun and some of the greatest gaming classics were availableon the PS2. So you might find a brilliant game for an excellentprice. However some PS2 games are now considered rare and can besignificantly more expensive than even the newest games. These aregenerally absolute classics that provide fun for years however ifyou're planning on forking out that much cash make sure it's a gameyou really do want.

The Best Games Some of the best playstation 2 games in a variety of genresare as follows:


Playstation: Changing the nature of VideoGaming

The Playstation 2 has a history of changing thenature of gaming. This is through the wide variety of new andinteresting games that are released. Some of these games aredifferent from anything that has come before and this originalityleads on to many others taking up the ideas first seen in PS2games. As an example here is a review of Mirror's Edge whichalthough failing to reach the full heights of popular acclaim didhave some fascinating ideas some of which are still used today.



This is an excellent example of a PS2 game thatmoved away from the conventions of gaming and did something new. Itshows the level of change that the PS2 encouraged in the gamingworld and should be respected for its effect on future gaming.

The implementation of thePlaystation store on the PS3 has changed the nature of gaming yetagain. As with the Xbox live online store players can now purchasegames online and download them directly to the console. This allowsa whole new host of games that would otherwise not have beenpossible. For instance user made games known as Indie games arebecoming prevalent as well as a huge number of cheaper butprofessionally made Arcade games. These games tend to involve amuch simpler interface but can be just as addictive and fun. Thisnew online possibility has opened the way for other things as well,new features such as updates can make old games feel completelynew.

Many games are getting a new leaseof life through this with new maps, weapons, vehicles and anythingelse you can imagine to increase the shelf life of these games.However even this is not the most exciting aspect of theimplementation of the Playstation store. The best thing about thisis the possibility of releasing old games again which would not bepossible if they had to be released on disc. The cost of releasinga game on a disc is much more than that of making it available fordownload and therefore games that would commercially fail ifreleased in the traditional way can become hugely profitable. As anexample one hugely popular game that was thought never to return isthe racing game Wipeout. However due to popular demand and a newplatform for release it seems a remake of the very old Wipeoutgames looks set to become one of the biggest sellers. Here are somedetails:

The PS2 was followed up by the expensive butpowerful PS3 as well as the more reasonably priced PSP orPlaystation Pocket. Some game worlds have started being released onboth PS3 and PSP with slightly different games surrounding the samecharacters and control system. For instance God of War was releasedon the PS2 but now has a very well received PSP version:



The PSP seems to have exceededexpectations by selling far more than was originally expected. Thishas led Sony to use the PSP as one of their key expansion productsthat will help to push the company into the top echelons of thegaming industry.

Cheat Codes and Game Mods

The availability of cheat codes hasled to a new era in video gaming. Cheats had been used with PCgames quite frequently due to the ability of some clever, PC savvy,people to access the game code and edit it. This could change thenature of the game completely and allow the player to come up withnew gravity effects or fly their character through walls. Inessence these mods, as they came to be known, allowed the playercomplete control over the game and could therefore be used tocreate entirely new ways of playing. Consoles on the other handwere somewhat lacking in this advantage. This is simply becauseit's almost impossible to use a console in the same way as acomputer. You cannot access the internal menu's and code on a gamewhen using a console because they are built solely for the purposeof playing games.

To rectify this issue gamedevelopers started building codes into their game that can beaccessed by pressing a select number of buttons on the controller.These buttons have to be pressed at the right time in the rightorder to activate a cheat, and thus cheat codes were born. Thesewere never advertised on the game and it was generally left up tothe player to discover them and then share them with other players.In reality this was rarely the case and most often a game developerwould leak the cheats on to the internet for everyone tosee.

These new cheats allowed gamers toplay their games in a new way. For instance Tony HawksSkateboarding games would let you turn off gravity and flythousands of feet into the air. Cheats have been made that let youdo just about anything, from invincibility to invisibility andeverything in between. This began to bring up the question ofwhether it was worth cheating before you completed a game as thecheats could take all of the challenge away.

Movie Games and MusicGames

Another thing which has becomecommon among game developers is to take a popular movie and turn itinto a game. This has become a very predictable tactic as it isbelieved, often correctly, that a very basic and relatively badgame can make a lot of money by piggy backing on a films success.For instance

Another new craze that began on thePS2 is the music genre of game. These are everywhere in manydifferent forms and allow the player to play music or sing in linewith a variety of songs. These games generally come with anelectronic gaming pad in the shape of an instrument. The playermust hit the buttons (the notes) in time to the music to achieve ahigh score and unlock new songs.

Here's some information about someof the newest and most popular games in this genre.

First up Guitar Hero III:Legends of Rock Bundle. The third game from the Guitar Hero seriesis going to rock your face off. You will channel your inner guitargod as you thrash your way through all sorts of venues. In additionto standard Guitar Hero features you know and adore, this game hasall kinds of killer new options such as the new multiplayeraction-inspired battle mode, grueling boss battles, a bevy ofexclusive unlockable content, and authentic rock venues. Theexpanded online multiplayer game modes will also allowaxe-shredders worldwide to compete head-to-head for true legendaryrock status. Best of all, check out the new songs! Players can nowshred to a set list from many of the greatest rock songs everrecorded.

In all the Sony Playstation franchise has in recentyears changed the face of gaming more than once. They continuallyprovide new and amazing technology in a variety of ways that linksin with game developers to produce some of the best gamingexperiences in the world. And all of this from the comfort of yourown home, and even in a portable version. Hopefully Sony willcontinue to produce high quality consoles and high quality games tokeep the gaming population desperate for their next Playstation fixand another new era in gaming. The Sony Playstation and itsdescendants are definitely here to stay.


