ESPN
Launched: September 7, 1979 as the flagship network.
Households: Surpassed 90 million households on June 1, 2005.
Programming Hours: more than 5,100 live and/or original hours of sports programming presented annually more than 65 sports including MLB, NBA, NFL, WNBA, college football, men's and women's college basketball, including every game of the women's basketball tournament, tennis, PGA and LPGA Tour golf, Little League World Series, the X Games and the Great Outdoor Games. ESPN Original Entertainment (EOE), the newest ESPN programming franchise, creates branded programming outside of the network's traditional event and sports news genres.

SportsCenter
Debut: September 7, 1979, ESPN's first show.
Flagship: SportsCenter is ESPN's flagship studio show and television's only nightly, one-hour sports news program. Offering in-depth reports on breaking news, creative highlights, features and in-depth analysis from award-winning journalists, SportsCenter is television's most comprehensive and longest-running sports news show. The 25,000th show aired August 25, 2002. Viewership: As many as 88 million people a month watch SportsCenter.

Event Ownership
ESPN has created or acquired events it owns, markets and televises to increase its value to fans, advertisers and affiliates. Examples include the X Games, Winter X Games; ESPN Outdoors featuring the CITGO Bassmaster Classic and Great Outdoor Games; the ESPY Awards, Skins Games, Jimmy V Classic (men's and women's college basketball), the PlainsCapital Fort Worth, Sheraton Hawaii and Las Vegas Bowls, and College Football Awards.

ESPN HD
Launched: ESPN HD, a high-definition simulcast service of ESPN, launched on March 30, 2003 with ESPN's first Major League Baseball game of the season, Texas at Anaheim.
Households: Over two million and growing. ESPN's industry-leading sports programming is a great match for the clarity and widescreen format of high-definition television. With the opening of ESPN's Digital Center, over 400 games will be originally produced in HD in 2005.
Format: 720 progressive scan.
Fast facts: biggest HD commitment in sports; first 24-hour sports service; widest variety in sports; high profile events like MLB, NBA, NFL, NHL, Women's Basketball Final Four, College World Series; best collection of sports assets; high-end production; significant investment in facility, trucks and equipment; compelling viewing experience; supports affiliates' rollout of HD; offers quality environment for advertisers; provides content to drive consumer demand of HDTV.

ESPN2
Launched:

ESPN2 debuted on October 1, 1993, as a sister station of ESPN. Originally nicknamed "the deuce," ESPN2 was to be branded as a network for a younger generation of sports fans featuring edgier graphics as well as extreme sports like motocross, snowboarding, and BMX racing. This mandate was phased out by 2001, as the channel increasingly served as a second outlet for ESPN's mainstream sports coverage.


Households: Over 89 million households.
Programming Hours: more than 4,800 live and/or original hours of sports programming annually featuring MLB, NBA, college football and basketball, golf, tennis, auto racing and more. Cold Pizza, the network's two-hour morning show, combines sports with pop culture and lifestyle features. ESPN Hollywood, a nightly sports and entertainment news program, and Quite Frankly, hosted by Stephen A. Smith,debuted this year. Rapid Growth: ESPN2, launched Oct. 1, 1993, reached 50, 60, 65, 70, 75 and 80 million homes faster than any network previously.
Penetration: ESPN2 is now available in 96% of ESPN households.

ESPN2 HD
Launched: January 6, 2005 as a simulcast of ESPN2.
Programming: Over 150 live telecasts in its first year - featuring college football plus men's and women's college basketball, the Little League World Series and Major League Baseball.

Hours: Together, ESPN HD and ESPN2 HD will offer viewers over 6,000 hours of originally produced high-definition programming and over 2,000 original programs.

ESPN Classic
Launched: May 6, 1995 (as Classic Sports Network) with 6,500 households in Ada, Okla.
Households: Over 58 million homes; the base has grown more than 600 percent since ESPN's acquisition.
Acquisition: On Oct. 9, 1997, ESPN acquired Classic Sports Network (since renamed ESPN Classic), a 24-hour, all-sports network.
Programming Philosophy: devoted to highlighting and celebrating the timeless events, personalities, moments and stories comprising the heritage of sports. As a curator of sports history, ESPN Classic connects the past with the present-day sports landscape, providing sports fans with perspective, context and relevancy.
Programming Lineup: Includes a combination of live and classic sporting events; original entertainment series such as Classic Now, Cheap Seats, Who's #1?, and Top 5 Reasons You Can't Blame; Reel Classics, a weekly sports movie series; and documentary programming, including the Emmy and Peabody Award-winning SportsCentury. Programming relates to MLB, NBA, NFL, NHL, NASCAR, boxing (including the ESPN Big Fights Library), tennis, golf, college football and basketball.

ESPNEWS
Launched: Nov. 1, 1996 with 1.5 million subscribers.
Subscribers: Over 45 million homes full-time; 11 million part-time.
Viewership Growth: Experienced 22 consecutive months of year-to-year growth in household impressions.
Immediacy: ESPNEWS, the only 24-hour sports news network, has established itself as an immediate source of sports news and information.
Philosophy: merge ESPN's on-air and online entities to present the ultimate interactive sports news outlet.
Relaunch: On Sept. 7, 2001, ESPNEWS relaunched with new elements including enhanced interactive features, graphics and a television first - highlights combined with box scores and shot charts.
Programming: The Hot List, 4 Qtrs, NFL Monday Quarterback, NFL Blitz, The Pulse, College Coaches' Spotlight, ESPNEWS Post-Game Extra, press conferences.

ESPN Deportes
Launched: Jan. 7, 2004. ESPN Deportes is: a 24-hour, Spanish-language sports network serving the Spanish-speaking U.S. sports fan.
Productions: Feature separate on-site teams with Spanish-speaking commentators, Spanish-language interviews, graphics, and commercials.
Programming: live events including Dominican Baseball League, Pacific League Baseball from Mexico, NBA, NFL, MLB, boxing, UEFA Champions League, Wimbledon, and more; its own Spanish-language edition of SportsCenter; and other news and information shows including ESPN Perfiles, Fuera de Juego, Fbol Picante, Cronetro, and NFL Semanal.
History: ESPN Deportes began as a Sunday night programming block in July 2000 when ESPN and Major League Baseball offered Spanish-language telecasts of the Home Run Derby and select Sunday Night Baseball games. Starting in 2001, ESPN Deportes began offering full Sunday Night Baseball and Sunday Night NFL schedules, as well as boxing.
Brand Extensions: The roster of ESPN Deportes-branded initiatives also includes ESPNdeportes.com, a fully integrated Spanish-language website; ESPN Deportes Radio, which offers exclusive Spanish-language broadcasts of the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, League Championship Series, and World Series, as well as daily talk shows and SportsCenter updates; ESPN Deportes La Revista, a magazine collaboration between ESPN, Inc. and Editorial Televisa, the largest publisher of Spanish-language titles in the world, published monthly and offering content targeted to the interests of U.S. Hispanics, including coverage of Major League Baseball, as well as Caribbean and Mexican League baseball; boxing; NFL; Latin American, European, and international soccer; auto racing and action sports; and ESPN Deportes Wireless, which offers Sprint and Verizon mobile phone subscribers images of their favorite Latino sports stars.



Programming: The ESPNU schedule will feature approximately 300 live events (regular-season and championships) in the network's first year. Action includes a variety of top football and men's and women's basketball mixed with baseball, softball, volleyball, lacrosse, ice hockey, wrestling and more. ESPNU will also offer comprehensive studio programming, replays of ABC Sports, ESPN, ESPN2 and ESPN Regional Television games, plus specials and more.
Production: ESPN Regional Television (ERT) in Charlotte, N.C. handles production responsibilities for ESPNU.
Multimedia Initiative: The television network is the key component of the multimedia ESPNU initiative that delivers college sports content across ESPN's family of services, such as ESPN.com, ESPN The Magazine, ESPN Mobile (wireless), ESPN Radio, ESPN Interactive, ESPN360 (broadband), merchandising and more.

ESPN Regional Television
Acquired: On May 9, 1994, ESPN acquired Creative Sports (since renamed ESPN Regional Television), a tv/radio sports marketing, syndication and production company.
Production: produces events for ESPN networks, ABC Sports and other national, regional and local outlets. Events include college football, college basketball, the popular "Skins Games," the Fort Worth, Hawaii and Las Vegas Bowls, the College Football Awards and much more.
Marketing: exclusive college marketing agreements with Iowa St., Kansas, Oregon, South Florida, TCU, the University of Alabama-Birmingham and UNLV. Syndication: exclusive syndication rightsholder for Big Ten, BIG EAST, Conference USA and Mountain West football and men's basketball, as well as Big 12 men's basketball. ERT, the nation's largest syndicator of intercollegiate sports programming, produces more than 740 college TV programs, including 575 games and 165 coaches' shows and specials.

ESPN Today
Launched: June 5, 2001.
Interactivity: the industry's first dedicated interactive sports channel, provides viewers with text and graphics of sports-related information including top news stories, scores, statistics, standings and schedules, plus links which directly tune to the ESPN networks - all available on demand using the television remote control.

ESPN Pay-Per-View
Launched: June 2003.
Offerings: ESPN Pay-Per-View, a new service based primarily on pay-per-view events, featuring NCAA Baseball Championship games, martial arts programs, fantasy league specials, and EOE-produced movies joins ESPN's other PPV packages - ESPN GamePlan and ESPN Full Court. Boxing: ESPN Pay-Per-View offered its first four-fight boxing card at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas on April 23, 2005. The fight was also available online at ESPN.com and marks the first time that such a high-profile night of boxing was carried live online.

ESPN International
Formed: January 1988, growing ESPN, Inc.'s global footprint on all seven continents; began syndicating programming in 1983.
Networks: 30 reaching 192 countries and territories. ESPN (Latin America), ESPN Brasil, ESPN+, ESPN Dos (Mexico); TSN, RDS, ESPN Classic Canada, NHL Network, Animal Planet, Discovery Channel, Discovery Civilization, Le Reau Info-Sports (Canada); ESPN Asia, ESPN India, ESPN Taiwan, ESPN Hong Kong, Star Sports Asia, Star Sports India, Star Sports South East Asia, Star Sports Hong Kong, MBA-ESPN Sports (Korea); Sports-i ESPN (Japan), ESPN (Australia), ESPN (New Zealand); Orbit ESPN Sports, ESPN (Africa), ESPN Israel; ESPN Classic Sport (France), ESPN Classic Sport (Italy), and ESPN Classic Sport (English-language feed).
Languages: 12 (Arabic, Cantonese, English, French, German, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin, Portuguese, and Spanish).
Programming includes: UEFA Champions League, Spanish Premier League, English Premier League, and Italian Serie A soccer; International Cricket; NBA; MLB; NFL; NHL; IRL and Formula One auto racing; the Masters, PGA Championship, British Open, and US Open golf majors; as well as Wimbledon, Roland Garros, the Australian Open, and US Open tennis Grand Slams.
SportsCenter: There are nine locally produced versions of SportsCenter outside of the U.S. serving viewers in Asia, Brazil, Argentina, Canada, Hong Kong, India, Latin America, Mexico, and Taiwan. SportsCenter is transmitted in five languages -- Spanish, Portuguese, English, Cantonese and Mandarin. International business entities also include radio, print, internet, wireless, consumer products, and event management.
ESPN The Magazine: A Chinese-language edition of is published monthly and distributed in Mainland China, including Beijing and Shanghai, as well as Hong Kong.

RADIO
ESPN Radi o
Launched: January 1, 1992.
Joint Venture: with ABC Radio handling sales and affiliations.
Affiliates: The country's largest sports radio network, ESPN Radio provides programming to more than 700 affiliates nationwide.
Full-time Affiliates: more than 290 stations including New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Dallas and Pittsburgh.
Programming includes: NBA and Major League Baseball games, including the Finals and World Series; College football's BCS Series; Monday - Friday: Mike and Mike in the Morning (Mike Greenberg and Mike Golic), 6-10 a.m. ET; The Herd with Colin Cowherd, 10 a.m. - 1 p.m.; The Dan Patrick Show, 1-4 p.m.



ESPN Radio currently has five company-owned stations in New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Dallas, and Pittsburgh. Most other markets have ESPN Radio affiliates, whether they be part-time or have their entire format dedicated to ESPN Radio. The Walt Disney Company did not include the ESPN Radio network or the Radio Disney network in the recent sale of ABC Radio to Citadel Broadcasting; however, ESPN Radio as well as its Spanish counterpart ESPN Deportes Radio are still considered to be a part of the ABC Radio family.



ESPN Deportes Radio
Events : exclusive, national Spanish-language radio broadcasts of Major League Baseball's All-Star Game, League Championship Series and World Series. ESPN Deportes Radio is partnering with Lotus Communications to provide coverage of Mexican League Soccer with exclusive broadcasts in the U.S. of all the Chivas de Guadalajara home matches starting with the 2006 season.
Talk shows include: Jorge Ramos y 10 m, weekdays 4 - 7 p.m. ET; Atacando con tres, soccer talk; ESPN al despertar; a fast-paced, informative morning drive show; A los golpes, a one-hour, fast-paced weeknight program; SportsCenter; updates every 20 minutes throughout the day.


ESPN International Radio
Reach: Began syndicating branded radio content in 2000 and now reaches 15 countries.

NEW MEDIA
ESPN.com




ESPN.com is the official website of ESPN and a division of ESPN Inc. Since launching in 1995 as ESPNet.SportsZone.com, the website has developed numerous sections including: Page 2, SportsNation, ESPN 360 , ESPN Motion , My ESPN, ESPN Sports Travel, ESPN Video Games, ESPN Insider, ESPN.com's Fanboard , ESPN Fantasy Sports and ESPNU.com. ESPN.com also has partnerships with MLB.tv, NBA.com , WNBA.com , NHL.com , Baseball America, Golf Digest, Scouts Inc. , Jayski.com, USGA.org and Masters.org .

It also has sections devoted to certain sports including: the NHL , NFL , MLB , NBA , NASCAR, IRL, College , Golf and Soccer . Each section contains pages devoted to: GameCast, Scores, Teams, Schedules, Standings, Players, Transactions, News Wires, Injures and Columnists pages. ESPN.com's primary competitors are Foxsports.com, CBSSports.com, NBCSports.com, SI.com and SportingNews.com, but to date ESPN.com is the most used sports website on the internet



Launched: April 1, 1995 and recently celebrated its 10th anniversary.
Users: ESPN.com, the leading sports Web site, averages more than 14 million unique users per month, more than any other sports Web site, according to Neilsen Netratings (April 2004-April 2005).
Features: Up-to-the-minute sports news, statistics, analysis and scores; extensive video and audio programming; multiple free and premium fantasy games; free online poker; live event webcasts; live chat with players, ESPN experts and other sports personalities; a wide array of enterprise journalism; popular sections including Page 2 (humor, editorial, and pop culture), ESPN Insider (premium in-depth analysis and ESPN The Magazine content), SportsNation (interactive community forum); and a host of notable reporters and columnists including "The Sports Guy" Bill Simmons, Marc Stein, Andy Katz, John Clayton, Len Pasquarelli, Eric Neel, Scoop Jackson, Jim Caple, Rachel Nichols and more.
Awards: ESPN.com received the 2003 General Excellence in Online Journalism Award, the 2003 Editor and Publisher Eppy Award for online sports service, and is a three-time Webby Award winner, six-time People's Voice Award winner, and winner of multiple other awards.
ESPN Motion: In May 2005, ESPN.com launched a new version of its high-quality video delivery platform, ESPN Motion (originally launched in Feb. 2003). ESPN Motion allows millions of ESPN.com users each day to view video highlights, analysis and original programming, including: the original short-form animated series' The Sports Guy and Off Mikes; content relating to NFL, major college sports, MLB, auto racing, boxing, horse racing (including all three 2005 Triple Crown races) and more; and content from ESPN programs including Pardon The Interuption, Baseball Tonight, SportsCenter, Outside The Lines, and ESPN Classic's SportsCentury.

ESPN Mobile
Introduced: Fall 1995.
Mission: to serve the sports fan any time, anywhere and via any device. ESPN.com and SportsTicker provide ESPN-branded, up-to-the-minute scores, headlines and fantasy updates to numerous wireless providers.
Growth: ESPN's wireless lineup features agreements with every major U.S. carrier.
Mobile ESPN: In early 2006, ESPN will launch Mobile ESPN, the first national U.S. wireless phone service specifically targeted to sports fans. Personalized sports programming and entertainment from ESPN will be offered, along with sports news, information, commentary, analysis, statistics, ring tones, graphics, photos, logos and streaming video.

ESPN360
Launched: August 2001 as ESPN Broadband.
Description:

Programming: In 2005, ESPN360 added exclusive content, including 24 live college football games, highlighted by all six Army home football games, select SportsCenter promotions, and athlete interviews prior to the ESPY Awards.

