Jobs in Michigan (blog post)

When I moved to Michigan at the beginning of 2009, I began the adventure of a lifetime. My first step away from home and I was way across the other side of the country from family, alone and without a job. All I had was savings that, with pinching every penny, should last me for six months; the lion's share of it went to renting a dingy room in a dingier part of town.
Why Michigan? Why not? I had no special feeling for the place, no connections; I'd never been there before. I guess it just seemed like a good idea at the time. I'd jumped, with eyes wide open, into the deepest part of the pool of adult life I could find, now I had six months to learn how to swim. Or crawl, sopping wet, back home. I guess it was easier knowing that I did have that fallback, should I need it.
So my first task, obviously, was to get a job. The job market in Michigan is ever-changing and, at times, unpredictable.

Michigan Works! The first thing I did in looking for a job, was the first thing any jobseeker in Michigan does. I got in touch with Michigan Works!


But that still doesn't say what they could do, and did, for me. If anyone's still reading after all that marketing hype, (sorry for inserting it, but it does go to show what Michigan Works is, and why it is so unique in the country,) then we'll get on to the real nitty-gritty. What Michigan Works! did for me.


In addition to these, and other, jobseeker and employer services, most of the Michigan Works! Service Centers also provide information about child care services, public transportation, and other relevant services. The child care services I, obviously, was not too interested in, but it was useful to learn how to get about without a car of my own, which I could not, then, afford.
You can see for yourselves which other services I wanted to take advantage of. And to give you an idea of the range of the services on offer, I've listed a small selection here.


At the Battle Creek Michigan Works! Service Center you can take advantage of free Job Search Workshops, on condition that you have registered with Michigan Works! and added your resume to the Michigan Talent Bank. These workshops focus on computer literacy, resumes, interviewing and job development.
Similarly, the Albion Michigan Works! Service Center offers Computer Literacy Workshops on the first and second Thursday of every month.


All of the above, I took full advantage of. I wasn't particularly interested in further education, unless it could guarantee me a job. I wanted to work, so that I wouldn't need to go crawling back home with my (soaking wet) tail tucked 'tween my legs.


The partnerships are an integral part of the Michigan Works! system. Without these partners, the entire system would not function. Fortunately, there are an impressive number of partners. Some of these are:


The Job Show However, the Michigan Works! system, extensive as it is, is not the only resource I used in order to find a job.


Sounds fascinating, doesn't it? It was, in fact, a lot more boring than it sounds; at least, to me less than two weeks after I moved to Michigan. As time passed, and I began to realize how useful their information could be, their programs got considerably more interesting.
So, how did I put it all together? What did I really get out of the Michigan Works! Service Centers?
For a start, they gave me a list to help me figure out what I really wanted. This is the short form.


The other, highly useful, thing I got from the Michigan Works! Service Center is this:


There are a vast number of other resources you can turn to for assistance. These include, but are not limited to:


So, how did it go for me? What jobs are available? What jobs did I apply for? How many interviews did I get? And did I, after all this, actually get a job?
I think you can guess the answer to that last one, so the follow-up question is probably more interesting. How long did it take?

I'll start at the beginning. What jobs are there in Michigan? What jobs are there anywhere? You can pretty much guarantee that the job you're trained for exists in Michigan, just as it exists in all the other States. The only issue is whether or not they are hiring today. But that's also the same issue you'll have anywhere else.
What jobs did I apply for? I have no idea. Lots. Everything except brain surgery and judge, I think. That's what you do when looking for work. Apply for everything you think you're qualified for, and then apply for everything that doesn't require professional qualifications you don't have. And sometimes you even apply for them. Need experience you don't have? Apply anyway. Need skills you don't know? Learn them on the job. A friend said it best: apply, and let them decide whether you're right for the job or not; don't make that choice for them by not applying.
So I applied for everything. Among them--Facilities Maintenance Coordinator, Accounts Payable Clerk, Training opportunities, Sales Manager, Laundry Attendant, Independent Contractor selling cosmetics. Yes, I even applied to be the Avon Lady. I didn't get it.
Interviews? A few. Not as many as I wanted, and the first one was atrocious. I flubbed that one big time. I never had enough to get comfortable with them, but you only need one that works. That one I finally got.
Oh, and a word about responses. Don't expect any. It might seem only polite to send a message to all applicants saying "Thanks, but we hired someone else", but almost nobody does that. In most cases, you'll only hear back if you got an interview. So don't sit around waiting for responses that aren't coming, just apply to another job.
The first job I actually got, was Laundry Attendant. Not what I wanted, and not a job I intended to keep long, but it was enough to keep me in Michigan, and pay my bills, while I continued my search for my ideal job.
How long did it take? Almost five months. When I was beginning to run low on money and starting to wonder if I'd have to go back home. Now I am home, in Michigan, and have just started my dream job, after three years and as many short-term jobs.
I am now a Program Analyst.