REAL ESTATE APPRAISAL Real estate appraisal, property valuation or landvaluation is the practice of developing an opinion of the value ofproperty, usually in terms of its marketvalue . The need for appraisals arises from the heterogeneousnature of property as an investment class. No two properties areidentical, and all properties differ from each other in theirlocation - which is the most important determinant of their value.So no centralized auction setting for the trading of propertyassets exists, as there is for trade in corporate stock as anexample. The absence of a market-based pricing mechanism thereforeestablishes the need for expert independent appraisal / valuationof real estate/property on a case by case basis.
A real estate appraisal is performed by a licensedor certified appraiser (in many countries also known as a propertyvaluer or land valuer, and in Britain as a "valuation surveyor").If the appraiser's opinion is based on market value, then thisshould depend on the highest and best use of the land (andimprovements) concerned. For mortgage valuations of improvedresidential property in America though, the appraisal is most oftenreported on a standardized form, such as the Uniform Residential Appraisal Report commonly used.Appraisals of more complex property (for example income producing,or raw land) are usually reported in a narrative appraisalreport. There are several definitions ofvalue that may be reported by a real estate appraisal generally.Some of the most common are: TYPES OFVALUE Market Value - The price at which an assetwould trade in a competitive auction setting. Market value isusually synonymous with open market value or fair value too.International norms define Market Value as "t heestimated amount for which a property should exchange on the dateof valuation between a willing buyer and a willing seller in anarms-length transaction after proper marketing, wherein the partieshad each acted knowledgably, prudently, and withoutcompulsion ". Value-in-Use - The is the net present value ofcash flow that an asset generates for a specific owner under aspecific use. Value-in-use is the value to one particular user, andis usually below the market value of a property. Investment Value - This is the value to oneparticular investor, and is usually higher than the market value ofa property. Insurable value -This is the value of real property covered by an insurance policy . Generally it does notinclude site value. Liquidation value - This may be analyzed aseither a forced liquidation - or an orderly liquidation - and is acommonly sought standard of value in bankruptcy proceedings. Itassumes a seller who is compelled to sell after an exposure periodwhich is less than the market-normal time frame.

PRICE VERSUS VALUE
It is important to distinguish between market valueand price. A price obtained for a specific property under aspecific transaction may or may not represent that property'smarket value - special considerations may have been present, suchas a special relationship between the buyer and the seller, or elsethe transaction may have been part of a larger set of transactionsin which the parties had engaged.
Another possibility is that a special buyer mayhave been willing to pay a premium over and above the market value,if his or her subjective valuation of the property (its subjectiveinvestment value) was higher than the market value itself. Anexample of this would be the owner of a neighboring property who,by combining their own property with the subject property, couldthereby obtain greater economies-of-scale.
Such situations often arise in corporate finance,as for example when a merger or acquisition is concluded at a pricewhich is higher than the value represented by the price of theunderlying stock. The usual rationale for these valuations is thatthe 'sum is greater than its parts', since full ownership of acompany entails special privileges for which a potential purchaserwould be willing to pay. Such situations arise in real estatemarkets as well. It is the task of the real estate appraiser /property valuer to judge whether a specific price obtained under aspecific transaction is indicative of market value, or not.

Market Valuation inAmerica
In the US, appraisals are based on a specificstandard of value (foreclosure value, fair market value, distressedsale value, investment value and so on). The most commonly useddefinition of value is market value though,in terms of how generalguidance for how market value should be defined: Value is essentially an opinion, that presumes thetransfer or sale of a property as of a certain date, under specificconditions as set forth in the definition of the term, and asidentified by the appraiser as applicable in an appraisal. Thus, the definition of value used in an appraisalis based on a set of assumptions about the market in which thesubject property may transact. This becomes the basis for selectingcomparable data for use in the analysis itself. These assumptionswill vary from definition to definition. but generally fall intothe following three categories:

THREE APPROACHES TO VALUE As mentioned, there are three methodologies fordetermining value. These are usually referred to as the" three approaches to value ": The cost approach The sales comparison approach and The income approach However, the recent trend in business tends to beinclining towards the scientific methodology of appraisal based onthe foundations of quantitative-data, risk and geographical basedapproaches. Several analysts have provided a review on the methodsused in the industry, involving comparison between conventionalapproaches and more advanced ones. The appraiser considering three approaches willdetermine which one or more may be applicable - based on the scopeof work determination, -and from that develop an appraisalanalysis. Costs, income, and sales vary widely from one situationto the next, and particular importance is given to the specificcharacteristics of the theme. Consideration is also given to the market for theproperty appraised. Appraisals of properties that are typicallypurchased by investors (e.g. skyscrapers) may give greater weightto the income approach, while smaller retail or office properties -often purchased by owner-users - may give greater weighting to thesales comparison approach. While this may seem simple, it is notalways that obvious. For example, apartment complexes of a givenquality tend to sell at price per apartment, and as such the salescomparison approach may be more applicable. Single familyresidences though are most commonly valued with greatest weightingtowards the sales comparison approach, but, if a single familydwelling is in a neighborhood where all or most of the dwellingsare rental units, then some variant of the income approach mayprove more useful.

COST APPROACH
The cost approach was formerly called the summationapproach. The theory is that the value of a property can beestimated by summing the land value and the depreciated value ofany improvements on it. The value of the improvements is oftenreferred to by the abbreviation RCNLD (reproduction cost ( new less depreciation orreplacement cost less depreciation ). *Reproduction refers to reproducing an exactreplica.
*Replacement cost refers to the cost of building ahouse or other improvement which has the same utility, but usingmodern design, workmanship and materials. In practice, appraisers use replacement cost, andthen deduct a factor for any functional dis-utilities associatedwith the age of the subject property. In most instances when the cost approach isapplied, the overall methodology is a hybrid of the cost and salescomparison approaches. For example, while the replacement cost toconstruct a building can be determined by computing the labor,material, and other costs, land values and depreciation must bederived from an analysis of comparable data. The cost approach is generally regarded reliablewhen used on newer structures, although the method tends to becomeless reliable for older real estate. The cost approach is often theonly reliable approach when dealing with special use propertiesthough, as is the case with public assembly venues andmarinas.

SALES COMPARISON APPROACH
A Comparative Market Analysis (CMA) examines theprice - or price per unit / area of similar properties being soldin the marketplace. Similar properties are of similar squarefootage, number of levels, age of the home, condition of home, andarea proximity of the subject home.
Simply put, the sales of properties similar to thesubject are analyzed and the sale prices adjusted to account fordifferences in the comparables to the subject property to determinethe value of the target. This approach is generally considered themost reliable, if adequate comparable sales exist. In any event, itis the only independent check on the reasonableness of an appraisalopinion. Comparables used by appraisers are considered "worthy" tobe used by the appraiser if they were sold within the last twelvemonths of the appraisal date of the subject property. Someappraisers allow sales only within 6 months of the subjectproperty. This differs with each company that is hired to appraisethe subject property, and, of course, recent activity in thatparticular market. When initially preparing a CMA, the agent willsearch back twelve months from the day of their CMA preparation inlocal transfer records. It's essential to keep in mind that, whenthe subject home is the subject to informal agreement between buyerand seller (or gets an "accepted offer"), a lender of the buyer mayfollow up with a formal valuation. Some comparisons as the partiesoriginally used may not be deemed "worthy" then, depending on thedate the comparable was sold.


INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH
The income capitalization approach (often referredto simply as the "income approach") is used to value commercial andinvestment properties. Because it is intended to directly reflector model the expectations and behaviors of typical marketparticipants, this approach is generally considered the mostapplicable valuation technique for income-producing properties, -especially where sufficient market data exists to supply thenecessary inputs and parameters for the calculation. In a commercial income-producing property thisapproach capitalizes on income stream leading to a valueindication. This can be done using revenue multipliers, orcapitalization rates applied to the first-year net operatingincome. This refers to gross potential income (GPI), less vacancyand collection loss, less operating expenses (but excluding debtservice, income taxes, and/or depreciation charges applied byaccountants). Alternatively, multiple years of net operatingincome can be valued by the discounted cash flow analysis model.The DCF is widely used to value larger and more expensiveincome-producing properties, such as large office towers. Thistechnique applies market-supported yields (or discount rates) tofuture cash flows (such as annual income figures and typically alump reversion from the eventual sale of the property) to arrive ata present value indication.

Market Valuation in theUK


In the United Kingdom, valuationmethodology has traditionally been classified into five differentmethods:
COMPARABLE METHOD Used formost types of property where there is good evidence of previoussales. This is analogous to the sales comparison approach outlinedabove.

INVESTMENT /INCOME METHOD Used for most commercial and residentialproperty that is producing future cash flows through the letting ofthe property. If the current Estimated Rental Value and the passingincome are known - as well as the market-determined equivalent yield - then the property value can bedetermined by means of a simple model. Note though, that thismethod is really a comparison method, since the main variables aredetermined by the market. In standard US practice, however, theclosely related capitalization is confounded under the generalclassification of the income capitalization approach (seeabove).


ACCOUNTS / PROFITMETHOD Used for trading properties where evidence of ratesis slight, such as hotels, restaurants and old-age homes. Athree-year average of operating income (derived from the profit andloss or income statement) is capitalised using an appropriateyield. Note that, since the variables used are inherent to theproperty and are not market-derived, and unless appropriateadjustments are made, the resulting value will be the Value-in-Useor Investment Value, not the Market Value.


DEVELOPMENT /RESIDUAL METHO D Used for properties ripe for development orredevelopment, or indeed for bare land only.
CONTRACTOR'S / COST METHOD Used for only those properties not bought and sold on the openmarket. Both the development / residual method and the contractor's/ cost method would be grouped in the US under the cost approach asreferred to above.

3FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Scope of work While regulators have always required appraisers toidentify the scope of work needed to produce credible results, itbecame clear in recent years that appraisers do not always fullyunderstand the process for developing this adequately. Informulating the scope of work for a credible appraisal, the conceptof a limited versus complete appraisal ,and the use of thedeparture rule regularly cause confusion among clients, appraisers,and appraisal reviewers in general.
In order to deal with this, the guidelines wereupdated in 2006 with what came to be known as the scope of workprinciples. In short, these eliminated departure rules, and theconcept of a limited appraisal a too. In terms of this, appraiserswere required to identify six key parts of the appraisal paradigmat the beginning of each new assignment: Client and other intended users Intended use of the appraisal and appraisalreport Definition of value (e.g. market, foreclosure,investment etc) Any hypothetical conditions or extraordinaryassumptions The effective date of the appraisalanalysis The salient features of the subjectproperty Based on these factors, the appraiser is requiredto identify the scope of work needed, -including the methodologiesto be used, the extent of investigation, and the applicableapproaches to value. The new rules provide explicit requirements,so that that the minimum standards for scope of work generallyinclude: Expectations of the client and otherusers The policies of the appraiser's peers whocarry out similar assignments THE NEW RULES The Scope of Work is the first step in anyappraisal process in terms of these. Without a strictly definedwork scope, an appraisal's conclusions may not be viable. Bydefining this, an appraiser can begin to actually develop a valuefor a given property for the intended user, which is the intendeduse of the appraisal.

HIGHEST AND BEST USE
Highest and Best Use is a key principle in theappraisal process. It determines that use of the property whichproduces the highest value for the land, as if it were vacant.There are four steps to this. Firstly, the appraiser determines allthe uses which are legally permissible for the property. Secondly,of those uses which are legally permissible, which ones arephysically possible. Of those, this only includes those that arefinancially viable (sometimes referred to as economicallysupported). Of those uses which are feasible,one is selected thatis maximally productive for the site. In a simple context, theappraiser must do this twice, comparing the results each time If the land is vacant or in improved state,taking into account the costs of demolishing any existingimprovements. The outcome of this process is the highest and bestuse for the site. An appraisal of market value must explicitlyassume that the owner or buyer would employ the property in itshighest and best use, and therefore value the siteaccordingly. In more complex appraisal assignments (forexample contract disputes, litigation, brownfield or contaminatedproperty valuation and so on), the determination of highest andbest use may be much more complex, and may need to take intoaccount the various intermediate or temporary uses of the site, thecontamination remediation process, and the timing of various legalissues.

TYPES OF OWNERSHIP INTEREST
Implicit in the analysis of the subject property isa determination of the interest in the property being appraised.For most common situations (e.g. mortgage finance) simple interestis assumed since it is the most complete bundle of rightsavailable. However, in many situations, and in many societies thatdo not follow this basic principle some other form of interest maybe more common. While there are many different possible interestsin real estate, the three most common are: Fee simple value (known in the UK as freehold)- The most complete ownership in real estate, subject in common lawcountries to the powers reserved to the state (taxation, escheat,eminent domain, and police power etc) Leased fee value - This is simple interestencumbered by a lease. If the lease is at market rent, then theleased fee value and the fee simple value are equal. However, ifthe tenant pays more or less than market, the residual owned by theleased fee holder, plus the market value of the tenancy, may bemore or less than the fee simple value. Leasehold value - The interest held by atenant. If the tenant pays market rent, then the leasehold has nomarket value. However, if the tenant pays less than market, thedifference between the present value of what is paid and thepresent value of market rents could be a positive leasehold value.For example, a major chain-retailer may be able to negotiate abelow-market lease to serve as the anchor tenant for a shoppingcenter. This leasehold value may be transferable to another anchortenant, and, if so the retail tenant has a positive interest in thereal estate.

MASS APPRAISAL AND AUTOMATED VALUATION MODELS Automated valuation models are growing inpopularity and acceptance. These rely on statistical models such asmultiple regression analysis or geographic information systems.While these AVMs may be quite accurate, (especially when used in anhomogeneous area) there is also evidence that they are not accuratein other instances, such as when used in rural areas, or when theappraised property does not conform well to the neighborhood. AVM'shave also gained favor in class action litigation, and have beensubstantiated in numerous cases, both in American federal and statecourts, for example as appropriate method for dealing withlarge-scale real estate litigation problems, including incontaminated neighborhoods.

A Typical Residential Real Estate ValuationFlyer
The Real EstateAppraisal is an important part of your home buying transaction.Thisappraisal helps to establish what the property's market valueactually is, in fact it would likely be the main tool in helpingthe seller establish the proper selling price. Lenders require anappraisal when the home is offered as security for a loan; theywant to make sure that the property will sell for at least theamount of money it is lending. Real estate agents often use acomparative market analysis as an appraisal to help their homeseller determine a realistic asking price for their home. DON'T TRYTO DO THIS YOURSELF. TRUST YOUR LOCAL APPRAISALFRIENDS
Many times, experienced real estateagents will come quite close to an accurate appraisal, but usuallytheir appraisal is very detailed and is the only valuation lenderswill accept when deciding whether or not to lend the money.Recently appraisers have come under close watch from state andfederal officers. Many believe that fraud has taken place invarious areas of the country, and this has forced officials to takea closer look at how to regulate the appraiser industry. Givenpresent state and local policies it is far more difficult to makefraudulent appraisals and be able to get away with this these days.TRUST US WITH THIS CRITICAL ASPECT OF EVERY PROPERTY DEAL. ALL OURAPPRAISERS AND REALTORS ARE FULLY TRAINED AND REGISTERED.


The twomost common types of appraisals are the Sales Comparison Approachand the Cost Approach. The most common one in a residential area isthe SCA, where comparables are taken from similar properties tohelp determine a proper price.Although your personal approval isessential early on in the loan process, the final loan commitmentusually hinges on a consensus by the lender. A bank wants to makesure its investment is covered in case you default on theloan.