Land Rover is a subsidiary of Rover, a car manufacturer with a long history. The Land Rover Series 1 was launched back in 1948.

The important people in the development of the Land Rover concept were brothers Spencer and Maurice Wilks. They decided to develop a vehicle that would be simple in design, cheap to build, require minimal tooling and use as little sheet steel as possible as it was in short supply due to the war effort.The brothers soon came up with the idea of creating a utilitarian vehicle.

At the time Maurice Wilks owned a farm and used an imported

to get around the farm. When thinking about what he would replace it with, he realised there were no other options and thus spotted a gap in the market. The brothers then quickly decided that they should design their own replacement. Originally intended as a stop gap until the government relaxed steel quotas, work began on the new vehicle that Maurice named the Land Rover due to the potential uses on farmland.

The post-war steel shortage posed a problem, so

Birmabright was used for the bodywork as it was more readily available than steel at that time. This turned out to be a very good choice as with aluminum being much softer than steel tooling requirements could be minimized.Aluminium also benefits from being lightweight and more resistant to corrosion than steel.This was a good selling feature for a vehicle that would likely spend time in adverse conditions, be used in all weathers and on all terrains.

To reduce costs, a new method of putting together the chassis was developed by engineer Olaf Poppe which involved welding together strips of steel into a ladder-shaped box. This turned out to be more durable and strong than any previous chassis and the technique is used to this day.

Work began on a prototype in 1947, and it was finished that same year. The engine in the prototype was a 1,389 c.c. Rover 10 four-cylinder. However it was soon decided that this was nowhere near adequate as it could not get beyond forty horse power. Insufficient for this type of utility vehicle. So they then looked at the engine that had been more recently developed for the Rover "P3" 60 saloon.A 1,595 c.c. four-cylinder sloping-head petrol engine with an overhead inlet and side exhaust valves capable of producing fifty horse pwer at 4,000 rpm.The gearbox was also based on the one for the P3, but modified to include a step-down ratio of 2.52 to help with steep inclines. This would become another feather in the Land Rover cap, putting it a step above other vehicles.

The vehicle had a canvas roof and optional doors. They were basic but very well suited for operations in the field.



The Jeep relied on a basic dog clutch to engage four-wheel drive which resulted in terrible tire scrub on road bends, so Land Rover developed a solution for this problem with a permanently engaged four-wheel-drive transmission set up. The Land Rover was fitted with a free-wheel device between the transfer box and the front propeller shaft, so the front wheels could overrun the rear ones if needed. This allowed the Land Rover to outperform the Jeep on tight corners.

Initially twenty five Land Rovers were built and were shown at the Amsterdam Motor Show in 1948. There was a lot of interest in these new vehicles at the show, especially from farmers. Due to the impact of farmer on economic recovery after the war, they were exempt from car tax. The Land Rover also has appeal abroad where roads were bad, and with the simple design, repair costs could also be kept to a minimum. This new vehicle had a very wide appeal.

As the Land Rover was significantly different from other cars, it garnered a lot of publicity in the motoring press and also in other magazines and newspapers. Public awareness of the Land Rover rose rapidly and sales increased a a result. This 'stop-gap' vehicle to make the best of the post war situation with steel quotas in place turned out to be a real winner and the Land Rovers quickly started to out sell the standard Rover saloon cars.

As sales rose it became obvious that there was significant demand, and funds to to further develop the Land Rover to better meet the needs of the consumers. In 1952 the engine capacity was increased to 1,997 c.c. This extra power was due to a tendency of users to overload their vehicles. It was at this time that the idea of putting some of the creature comforts into the Land Rover was discussed. The idea was called the Road Rover, but the idea never made it into production.

Sales of the Land Rover continued to rise into the 60's. The versatility and ruggedness of the vehicle was soon recognized by the military and sales to the armed forces of most western nations became a major part of the business. They even made an extra light Land Rover, purpose made for air dropping into war zones. The vehicles were also adopted as standard for the recovery vehicles of both the AA and the RAC. Land Rovers were also converted into ambulances for hard to reach areas that a standard ambulance simply couldn't reach. The Land Rover became an important vehicle for many purposes the world over.

In 1966 the 500,000th Land Rover was produced. That same year Land Rover commissioned a comprehensive survey which reported that although the Land Rover has originally been intended for agricultural purposes, now around two thirds of Land Rovers were being used for purely recreational purposes.

Next came the idea of the 100-Inch Station Wagon project. This was the idea of Spen King and involved building a vehicle that would combine the comfort and performance of Rover cars with the off-road capabilities of the Land Rover.

The idea was put the public and the public confirmed that there was a need for such a vehicle. The first move was to add a 'luxury pack' to a standard Land Rover, This offered a few creature comforts such as well-upholstered front seats.

The next stage was to develop a new vehicle. Thestrong ladder type chassis was necessary in order to maintain the high levels of off-road durability, but something needed to be done to increase the ride comfort. The solution was to adopt long-travel coil spring suspension, the long coils allowing the large range of axle movement needed. A single Boge Hydromat self-leveling hydraulic strut was located centrally between the rear axle casing and the chassis frame to make sure that all the axle movement was available.

The V8 engine has a high power output which meant extra thought needed to be put into the transmission and braking. A permanent four-wheel drive set-up was designed with a third limited-slip differential between the axles. This was an improvement on the original free-wheel design.Four-wheel disc brakes were used to decrease stopping distances.

This new adaptation of the Land Rover was named the Range Rover and was launched in 1970 at the Blue Hills Mine in Cornwall. Only available with two doors and an opening tailgate. The Range Rover was an immediate hit and there was a lot of very positive publicity surrounding it. Sales were very high.

In the early 1980s, with some export markets in decline, it was noticed that there were greater profits to be made from luxury vehicles, and so the Range Rover underwent a makeover to increase the luxury factor of the vehicle. A four door version was released, and the option of automatic transmission was offered to make travelling from from road to off-road more comfortable. A new Land Rover was also released with improved suspension and a

V8 engine which increased performance. In 1985 fuel-injection was added to the V8 engine to meet new emission legislation and to increase power.

Land Rover officially entered the U.S. market in 1987 with the Range Rover.



Since 1990, the old standard Land Rover had been known as the Land Rover Defender, the name comes from the military use of this rugged vehicle. While the Discovery and Range Rover fitted a gap in the market for more luxurious vehicles, there was still a great demand for the sturdy utility version which was then dubbed the Defender.

In July 1993 the 1.5 millionth Land Rover vehicle was built.



The Freelander was launched in the late 90's, the first production vehicle with Hill Descent Control. This helps to optimize maneuverability when driving down steep slopes. It does this by automatically braking to keep the vehicle's speed correct.

Land Rover have often been regarded as a British version of the Jeep.The Land Rover was very successful and soon gained worldwide recognition. Each model was an improvement on the last, and in the mid-50s the Defender model was launched, which is still popular today.

the Chinese company Tata of India. This company have received many awards for their high quality, their models and their technological advances including two Queen's Awards for Enterprises.

For a truly unique Christmas or birthday present, you could treat a loved one to an experience day, taking 4x4 driving to the extreme, pushing the Land Rover defender to its limit on a unique mud course.
