Hoboken, incorporated on the 9th of April 1849 is in Hudson County, New Jersey and has a population of around 40 thousand. The town lies on the west bank of the Hudson River.

Hoboken has 48 streets laid out in a grid pattern East/West streets are numbered, the North/South streets are named. Many of them after US presidents such as Washington, Monroe, Adams and Madison. However it is thought that Clinton Street s is named after DeWitt Clinton, a 19th century politician .

Hoboken was first settled by the Dutch in the 17th century as part of the Novo Belgio (New Netherland) colony. Once a major shipping port, it is now mainly a dormitory town for workers in New York City.

Colonel John Stevens purchased the land on which the city sits and it was he who came up with the name Hoboken. It is not known exactly the meaning behind the name Hoboken, but it could be named after the Flemish town of Hoboken, or after the Von Hoboken family of Rotterdam. The word 'hobo' is thought to derive from the many groups of travellers who set out by railroad from Hoboken.

Hoboken started out as an island between the Hudson River on the east and the tidal lands of the New Jersey Palisades on the west. It was a campsite for the Hackensack part of the Lenape, that was used seasonally. The Lenape are thought to have lived on lands around the Hudson Delaware River for more than 2800 years . They would later be known as Delaware Indians. O n the 2nd of October 1609 an Englishman called Henry Hudson on a sailing trip on behalf of the Dutch East India Company arrived at Weehawken Cove in his ship The Half Moon and laid his claim on the area.

Weehawken Cove is a small body of water that extends westward from the Hudson River. The cove straddles the boundary between Hoboken and Weehawken. Most of the harbor is within Hoboken boundaries. A pair of apartment complexes have been built along the cove. The Hoboken side of the cove is the Hoboken Tea Building Walkway (an ongoing project to link the waterfront with a continuous park), which runs alongside the water and offers great public views of the cove. Manhattan is easily visible from the cove too.

The United New Netherland Company was set up to manage this new territory, and in 1623 it became a Dutch colony called New Netherland. In 1630 land was bought from the Lenape on which Hoboken would be founded.

This came about because Michael Pauw, the mayor of Amsterdam recieved a grant to build a colony on the west bank within four years with at least fifty residents. However Pauw didn't manage to get the fifty residents to the area within the alloted time frame, so he was forced to sell it back to the Dutch East India Company in 1633.

The land was next owned by Hendrick Van Vorst , who rented some of it out to a farmer called Aert Van Putten who built a house and a brewery there in 1643. This was the first ever brewery in North America.There then followed a series of Indian and Dutch raids and Van Putten was killed. His buildings were demolished, and all residents of this colony he called Pavonia had to go back to New Amsterdam. In 1664 there was little resistance when the English attempted to take control of New Amsterdam.

In 1674 the area became part of East Jersey and was divided up nto four administrative area. Hoboken became part of Bergen County. The area remained sparcely populated with a predominantly farming population, consisiting of both English-speaking settlers and Dutch. The land eventually fell into the posession of William Bayard. At the end of the Revolutionary War his property was confiscated by the Revolutionary Government of New Jersey. In 1784 and was subsequently bought at auction by Colonel John Stevens for 18,360 pounds sterling who developed the waterfront as a holiday destination for people from Manhattan. This turned out to be successful and he made quite a lot of money from this venture. Stevens was an inventor and he built the first ever steam -powered ferry with service between Manhattan and Hoboken which began service in 1811, bringing his waterfront guests more easily from Manhattan to Hoboken. He also designed and built a steam train to pull passenger carriages.

A spring water cave on the land called Sybil's Cave was opened up to the public as an attraction in 1832, for visitors to take the water. Edgar Allan Poe even wrote a short story about an event that happened there. The story is called The Mystery of Maried Roget. However in 1930s the water was found to be contaminated, the spring filled with concrete and the attraction closed down. It was opened up again in 2008. The cave extends 17 feet back, it contains four pillars and a cistern for spring water. Stevens a lso built several rows of housing in a grid pattern in Hoboken, some of which are still standing to this day.

In 1870 the Stevens Institute of Technology,

was built on the site of the Stevens family's former estate, This was his legacy.

By this time the shipping lines were regularly using Hoboken as a terminal port, and the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western Railroad created a terminal on the waterfront. German immigrants became the main group of people licing in the city due to its being a major destination port of the Hamburg America Line. Several large companies also set up factories in Hoboken to take advantage of the good transportation links.



which took place in 1846 at Elysian Fields and was a game between New York Nine and Knickerbocker Club . Due to a lack of suitable grounds in Manhattan, the Knickerbocker Club used the Elysian Fields.

The match was played under Alexander Joy Cartwright's rules and Cartwright was umpire.

By the 1850s, the grounds had become a popular home field for many Manhattan members of the National Association of Base Ball Players and many big games were subsequently played there. However in later years pitches were built in Manhattan and the popularity of the Elysian Fields diminished.

The Hoboken Terminal, built by the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad in 1907 is an historic landmark of national significance.

It was designed by architect Kenneth M. Murchison in the Beaux-Arts style. The main waiting area is a sight to behold with floral and Greek Revival motifs in tiled stained glass by Louis Comfort Tiffany. The terminal has been used as a set for several films and also for an Eric Clapton video.



During WWI the Hamburg-American Line piers in Hoboken were taken over and used for the war effort. Part of the city was under martial law. The high German population in the city led to anti-German problems and many of them were either forced to move to Ellis Island, or left the city of their own accord fearing for their own safety. Hoboken became the major point of embarkation for more than three million soldiers. It caused General Pershing to coin the famous slogan " Heaven , Hell or Hoboken... by Christmas ." After the war the main groups of people living in the city were the Italians and the Irish. There was also an influx of Jewish people from Europe who came to Hoboken and set up businesses. During the Depression there were jobs available in the ships yards and the factories. Tenement buildings were full to capacity.

Again, during WWII, Hoboken was a place of importance due to the location, the transportation and the many factories.

Many people moved out of Hoboken, property prices fell and the town was left in a state of disrepair. Some of the slums were demolished in an attempt to improve the city, but it did little to help the town.

The Clam Broth House which opened in 1899 was a landmark building however it was found to be structurally unsound and was condemned pulled down in 2004.The building was of interest due to the giant hand-shaped signs tht hung outside it. One pointed down towards the entrance, and the other was on a nearby building, which is still in place today.


The City of Hoboken is governed under the Faulkner Act system of a Mayor and a City Council consisting of nine members. Three members elected from the city as a whole, and six further members, one from each of the city's six wards The members are elected for year terms which are staggered. Candidates run independent of any political party backing. T he elections for Mayor of Hoboken and the city council have mostly operated by Hoboken's community.There has always been a strong connection between City Hall and the citizens of Hoboken. The mayor and council members have usually been born and raised in Hoboken.


A free concert series runs throughout the summer on Thursdays between 7 and 9pm in Sinatra Park.

Every Wednesday at sunset in June, July and August films are shown outdoors. Bring a picnic and a blanket and enjoy the free show. There are free fitness and yoga classes too.

The name Castle Point comes from Castille Point due to a resemblance to the Castilian coast in Spain. Castle Point is the highest point in Hoboken.


After your meal how about a trip to Maxwell's? A nightclub popular in the 80's featuring intimate shows from the B52s, REM, the Minutemen and the Feelies. Or if rock music is more your scene, then Whisky Bar at the train station end of Washington Street is a great place to spend an evening.

There are regular Arts and Crafts Fairs, festivals and music events in Hoboken too. There's always something entertaining going on!

The Hoboken Public Library runs various events throughout the year including Story Time for babies and toddlers.

was founded in 1986 and moved into its current location at 1301 Hudson St. in 2001 was once the W. & A. Fletcher Co. machine shop, a hub of the city's 19th century shipbuilding and repair industry. It presents displays on the city's history as well as exhibits of local artists' work. The museum

runs several tours of Hoboken each year including a historical house tour and a secret garden tour giving you a chance to learn a little more about the area and perhaps see some sights that are usually off limits to the public.


Hoboken's nickname is The Mile Square City, but it actually covers an area of two square miles.

The zip was invented in Hoboken, as was soft ice cream... by accident!


On July 29, 2005, a miniature statue of Jesus, part of a shrine at the corner of Jackson Street and Third Street, apparently opened one of its eyes on its own. Some believe it is a miracle, others believe it is a hoax.