The taxon Dinosauria was formallynamed by the English palaeontologist Richard Owen in 1842 as "adistinct tribe or suborder of Saurian reptiles". The term isderived from the Greek words ( deinos meaning "terrible","fearsome" or "formidable") and ñ ( saura meaning "lizard" or"reptile"). Owen chose it to express his awe at the size andmajesty of the extinct animals, not out of fear or trepidation attheir size and often-formidable arsenal of teeth andclaws.Dinosaurs were an extremely varied group of animals;according to a 2006 study, 527 dinosaur genera have been identifiedwith certainty so far, and 1,844 genera are believed to haveexisted.Some were herbivorous, others carnivorous. Some dinosaurswere bipeds, some were quadrupeds and others, such as Ammosaurus and Iguanodon , could walkjust as easily on two or four legs. Regardless of body type, nearlyall known dinosaurs were well-adapted for a predominantlyterrestrial, rather than aquatic or aerial, habitat.
There is also a taxonomic definition, which says that dinosaurs are defined as all descendants of the most recentcommon ancestor of Triceratops and modern birds. They are dividedinto Ornithischia (bird-hipped) and Saurischia (lizard-hipped),depending upon pelvic structure. Ornithischian dinosaurs had afour-pronged pelvic configuration, incorporating acaudally-directed (rear-pointing) pubis bone with (most commonly) aforward-pointing process. By contrast, the pelvic structure ofsaurischian dinosaurs was three-pronged, and featured a pubis bonedirected cranially, or forwards, only. Ornithischia includes alltaxa sharing a more recent common ancestor with Triceratops thanwith Saurischia, while Saurischia includes those taxa sharing amore recent common ancestor with birds than with Ornithischia. Ithas also been suggested that Dinosauria be defined as all thedescendants of the most recent common ancestor of Megalosaurus andIguanodon, because these were two of the three genera cited byRichard Owen when he recognized the Dinosauria.



A modern definition is the phylogenetic taxonomy.

Size

While the evidence is incomplete, it is clear that,as a group, dinosaurs were large. Even by dinosaur standards, thesauropods were gigantic. For much of the dinosaur era, the smallestsauropods were larger than anything else in their habitat, and thelargest were an order of magnitude more massive than anything elsethat has since walked the Earth. Giant prehistoric mammals such asthe Indricotherium and the Columbian mammoth were dwarfed by thegiant sauropods, and only a handful of modern aquatic animalsapproach them in size most notably the blue whale, which reaches upto 190,000 kg (209 tons) and 33.5 m (110 ft) in length.

Most dinosaurs, however, were much smaller than thegiant sauropods. Current evidence suggests that dinosaur averagesize varied through the Triassic, early Jurassic, late Jurassic andCretaceous periods. According to paleontologist Bill Erickson,estimates of median dinosaur weight range from 500 kg to 5 tonnes;a recent study of 63 dinosaur genera yielded an average weight inexcess of 850 kg comparable to the weight of a grizzly bear and amedian weight of nearly 2 tons, or about as much as a giraffe. Thiscontrasts sharply with the size of modern mammals; on average,mammals weigh only 863 grams, or about as much as a large rodent.The smallest dinosaur was bigger than two-thirds of all currentmammals; the majority of dinosaurs were bigger than all but 2% ofliving mammals.

Largest and smallest dinosaurs

Only a tiny percentage of animals ever fossilize,and most of these remain buried in the earth. Few of the specimensthat are recovered are complete skeletons, and impressions of skinand other soft tissues are rare. Rebuilding a complete skeleton bycomparing the size and morphology of bones to those of similar,better-known species is an inexact art, and reconstructing themuscles and other organs of the living animal is, at best, aprocess of educated guesswork. As a result, scientists willprobably never be certain of the largest and smallestdinosaurs.

The tallest and heaviest dinosaur known from acomplete skeleton is the Brachiosaurus specimen that was discoveredin Tanzania between 1907-12. It is now mounted and on display atthe Humboldt Museum of Berlin and is 12 m (38 ft) tall and probablyweighed between 30,000-60,000 kg (3366 short tons). The longestcomplete dinosaur is the 27 m (89 ft) long Diplodocus, which wasdiscovered in Wyoming in the United States and displayed inPittsburgh's Carnegie Natural History Museum in 1907.



There were larger dinosaurs, butknowledge of them is based entirely on a small number of incompletefossil samples. The largest herbivorous specimens on record wereall discovered in the 1970s or later, and include the massiveArgentinosaurus, which may have weighed 80,000-100,000 kg (88-121tons); the longest, the 40 m (130 ft) long Supersaurus; and thetallest, the 18 m (60 ft) Sauroposeidon, which could have reached asixth-floor window. The largest known carnivorous dinosaur wasSpinosaurus, reaching a length of 16-18 meters (53-60 ft), andweighing in at 9 tons. Other large meat-eaters includedGiganotosaurus, Mapusaurus, Tyrannosaurus rex andCarcharodontosaurus.



Not including modern birds like thebee hummingbird, the smallest dinosaurs known were about the sizeof a crow or a chicken. The theropods Microraptor, Parvicursor, andSaltopus were all under 60 cm (2 ft) in length.

The first perceived direct evidenceof herding behavior was the 1878 discovery of 31 Iguanodondinosaurs which were thought to have perished together inBernissart, Belgium, after they fell into a deep, flooded sinkholeand drowned. Despite the deposition of those skeletons being nowregarded as more gradual, other, well supported, mass death siteswere subsequently discovered. Those, along with multiple trackways,suggest that herd or pack behavior was common in many dinosaurspecies. Trackways of hundreds or even thousands of herbivoresindicate that duck-bills (hadrosaurids) may have moved in greatherds, like the American Bison or the African Springbok. Sauropodtracks document that these animals traveled in groups composed ofseveral different species, at least in Oxford, England, and otherskept their young in the middle of the herd for defense according totrackways at Davenport Ranch, Texas. Dinosaurs may have congregatedin herds for defense, for migratory purposes, or to provideprotection for their young.

Interpretations of dinosaur behavior are generallybased on the pose of body fossils and their habitat, computersimulations of their biomechanics, and comparisons with modernanimals in similar ecological niches. As such, the currentunderstanding of dinosaur behavior relies on speculation, and willlikely remain controversial for the foreseeable future. However,there is general agreement that some behaviors which are common incrocodiles and birds, dinosaurs' closest living relatives, werealso common among dinosaurs.

Jack Horner's 1978 discovery of a Maiasaura (thegood mother dinosaur) nesting ground in Montana demonstrated thatparental care continued long after birth among the ornithopods.There is also evidence that other Cretaceous-era dinosaurs, likethe Patagonian sauropod Saltasaurus (1997 discovery), had similarnesting behaviors, and that the animals congregated in huge nestingcolonies like those of penguins. The Mongolian maniraptoranOviraptor was discovered in a chicken-like brooding position in1993, which may mean it was covered with an insulating layer offeathers that kept the eggs warm. Trackways have also confirmedparental behavior among sauropods and ornithopods from the Isle ofSkye in northwestern Scotland. Nests and eggs have been found formost major groups of dinosaurs, and it appears likely thatdinosaurs communicated with their young, in a manner similar tomodern birds and crocodiles.



Some dinosaurs were socialcreatures. Recently discovered evidence indicatesthat theytravelled together and that some may even have migrated, becausedinosaur fossils have been found above the Arctic Circle, wherefood supply wouldhave been seasonal. Grouped hadrosaur nest siteshave been found with badlycrushed eggshells and skeletons of babydinosaurs; with slightly worn teeth; still in the nests, suggestingthat some babies stayed in their nests afterhatching and probablywere fed by parents.




The crests and frills of somedinosaurs, like the marginocephalians, theropods andlambeosaurines, may have been too fragile to be used for activedefense, so they were likely used for sexual or aggressivedisplays, though little is known about dinosaur mating andterritorialism. The nature of dinosaur communication also remainsenigmatic, and is an active area of research. For example, recentevidence suggests that the hollow crests of the lambeosaurines mayhave functioned as resonance chambers used for a wide range ofvocalizations.

From a behavioral standpoint, one of the mostvaluable dinosaur fossils was discovered in the Gobi Desert in1971. It included a Velociraptor attacking a Protoceratops, provingthat dinosaurs did indeed attack and eat each other. Whilecannibalistic behavior among theropods is no surprise, this too wasconfirmed by tooth marks from Madagascar in 2003.

There seem to have been no burrowing species ofdinosaur and few climbing species. This is somewhat surprising whencompared to the later mammalian radiation in the Cenozoic, whichincluded many species of these types. As to how the animals moved,biomechanics has provided significant insight. For example, studiesof the forces exerted by muscles and gravity on dinosaurs' skeletalstructure have demonstrated how fast dinosaurs could run, whetherdiplodocids could create sonic booms via whip-like tailsnapping,whether giant theropods had to slow down when rushing forfood to avoid fatal injuries, and if sauropods couldfloat.