A global navigationsatellite system (GNSS), the Global Positioning System (GPS) iscreated by the United States Department of Defense and managed bythe United States Air Force 50th Space Wing. Aside from being theonly fully useful GNSS in the world, it is free to use, and oftenit is used by different kinds of people for navigation purposes. Ituses a constellation of between 24 and 32 Medium Earth Orbitsatellites that transmit precise microwave signals, allowing GPSreceivers to determine their current location, time, and theirvelocity. Its official name is NAVSTAR GPS. Although NAVSTAR isoriginally not an acronym, a few acronyms have been created forit.

Since it became fullyoperational in 1993, GPS has become a widely used aid to navigationworldwide, and a useful tool for map-making, land surveying,commerce, scientific uses, and hobbies such as geocaching. Also,the precise time reference is used in many applications includingthe scientific study of earthquakes. GPS is also a required keysynchronization resource of cellular networks, such as the QualcommCDMA air interface used by many wireless carriers in a multitude ofcountries.
Its History The first satellite navigation system,Transit, used by the United States Navy was first successfullytested in 1960. Using a constellation of five satellites, it couldprovide a navigational fix approximately once per hour. In 1960,the U.S. Navy developed the Timation satellite, which proved theability to place accurate clocks in space, a technology that GPSrelies upon. In 1970s, the ground-based Omega Navigation System,based on single phase comparison, became the first world-widenavigation system.
The design of GPS is based partly on similarground-based radio navigation systems, such as LORAN and the DeccaNavigator developed in the early 1940s, and used during World WarII. Additional inspiration for the GPS came when the Soviet Unionlaunched the first Sputnik in 1957. A team of U.S. scientists ledby Dr. Richard B. Kershner were monitoring Sputnik's radiotransmissions. They discovered that, because of the Doppler effect,the frequency of the signal being transmitted by Sputnik was higheras the satellite approached, and lower as it continued away fromthem. They realized that since they knew their exact location onthe globe, they could pinpoint where the satellite was along itsorbit by measuring the Doppler distortion. After Korean Air Lines Flight 007 was shotdown in 1983 after straying into the USSR's prohibited airspace,[3]President Ronald Reagan issued a directive making GPS freelyavailable for civilian use as a common good.[4] The satellites werelaunched between 1989 and 1993.
Initially the highest quality signal wasreserved for military use, while the signal available for civilianuse was intentionally degraded ("Selective Availability", SA).Selective Availability was ended in 2000, improving the precisionof civilan GPS from about 100m to about 20m.


Military The military applications of GPS span manypurposes: Navigation: GPS allows soldiers to findobjectives in the dark or in unfamiliar territory, and tocoordinate the movement of troops and supplies. The GPS-receiversthat commanders and soldiers use are respectively called theCommanders Digital Assistant and the Soldier DigitalAssistant. Target tracking: Various military weaponssystems use GPS to track potential ground and air targets beforethey are flagged as hostile.These weapon systems pass GPSco-ordinates of targets to precision-guided munitions to allow themto engage the targets accurately. Military aircraft, particularlythose used in air-to-ground roles use GPS to find targets (forexample, gun camera video from AH-1 Cobras in Iraq show GPSco-ordinates that can be looked up in Google Earth). Missile and projectile guidance: GPS allowsaccurate targeting of various military weapons including ICBMs,cruise missiles and precision-guided munitions. Artilleryprojectiles with embedded GPS receivers able to withstandaccelerations of 12,000G have been developed for use in 155 mmhowitzers. Search and Rescue: Downed pilots can belocated faster if they have a GPS receiver. Reconnaissance and Map Creation: The militaryuse GPS extensively to aid mapping and reconnaissance. The GPS satellites also carry a set of nucleardetonation detectors consisting of an optical sensor (Y-sensor), anX-ray sensor, a dosimeter, and an Electro-Magnetic Pulse (EMP)sensor (W-sensor) which form a major portion of the United StatesNuclear Detonation Detection System. Civilian Many civilian applications benefit from GPSsignals, using one or more of three basic components of the GPS:absolute location, relative movement, and timetransfer.
The ability to determine the receiver'sabsolute location allows GPS receivers to perform as a surveyingtool or as an aid to navigation. The capacity to determine relativemovement enables a receiver to calculate local velocity andorientation, useful in vessels or observations of the Earth. Beingable to synchronize clocks to exacting standards enables timetransfer, which is critical in large communication and observationsystems. An example is CDMA digital cellular. Each base station hasa GPS timing receiver to synchronize its spreading codes with otherbase stations to facilitate inter-cell hand off and support hybridGPS/CDMA positioning of mobiles for emergency calls and otherapplications. Finally, GPS enables researchers to explore the Earthenvironment including the atmosphere, ionosphere and gravity field.GPS survey equipment has revolutionized tectonics by directlymeasuring the motion of faults in earthquakes.
To help prevent civilian GPS guidance frombeing used in an enemy's military or improvised weaponry, the USGovernment controls the export of civilian receivers. A US-basedmanufacturer cannot generally export a GPS receiver unless thereceiver contains limits restricting it from functioning when it issimultaneously (1) at an altitude above 18 kilometers (60,000 ft)and (2) traveling at over 515 m/s (1,000 knots). These parametersare well above the operating characteristics of the typical cruisemissile, but would be characteristic of the reentry vehicle from aballistic missile.
GPS tours are also an example of civilianuse. The GPS is used to determine which content to display. Forinstance, when approaching a monument it would tell you about themonument.
GPS functionality has now started to moveinto mobile phones en masse. The first handsets with integrated GPSwere launched already in the late 1990 s, and were available forbroader consumer availability on networks such as those run byNextel, Sprint and Verizon in 2002 in response to US FCC mandatesfor handset positioning in emergency calls. Capabilities for accessby third party software developers to these features were slower incoming, with Nextel opening up those APIs upon launch to anydeveloper, Sprint following in 2006, and Verizon soonthereafter.


Here are some quick tips whenbuying GPS: High resolution images on a size screen thatmakes sense for your application (car, hiking, etc.) will providethe best experience. Big screen high end units can come with 640 x480 displays which was a common resolution on 15 inch computerdisplays. Enhanced accuracy circuitry like WAAS andSBAS get mixed reviews for actual added accuracy however you canalways turn them off.
