Your Business on the 'Net A Short Guide to Designing and Hosting yourSmall Business Website


Why do I need awebsite?

On the web, yourcompetition is just a click away. You need a web site designstrategically built to win over your prospects and clients andcommunicate your critical business information clearly. In fact,your website will be your best salesman! If you want great ROI...awebsite is likely the best value for your marketing dollar -online, 24/7 - a custom website is a beautiful way for yourcustomers to experience and learn about yourbusiness.


Some benefitsof a Web Site: Expands your business Profit from sales increase Enhance current marketing Security of keeping ahead of thecompetition Enhance company image Web sites are easy to modify Web sites are considered a standard forbusiness today


This idea is sosimple! You need a small business website design now, but you don'twant to spend a fortune with an expensive website design firm. Youwant to keep your site up-to-date without paying huge maintenancecosts. Perhaps you already have a brand or a "look" and you don'twant to spend more money with a creative webagency.


There are twostyles of web pages for you to choose from; static anddynamic.

If you choose to use the help of a websitedesigner, how do you choose one? A simple search on Google willshow thousands, if not millions, of website designers all over theworld. A simple way of limiting the selection is to ask friends andcolleagues who have a business website who they chose, and why. Askthem if they are happy with there choice, and what they might havedone different.
Another way to limit the field is to search forwebsite designers in your city or district. This means that youwill likely be able to meet with the designer and discuss yourneeds in person, rather than via e-mail or telephone. You mightalso be able to find your perfect designer by searching fordesigners who specialise in your field, whether you are in businessin real estate, gymnastics equipment or book publishing.
A couple of points to remember when choosing awebsite design company are:

So I have a website designed, now what? Now you need somewhere to put your website so that yourcustomers can find it. For that you need a website Host.


What are the best web hosts? There are almost as many web hosting companies asthere are website designers. For a new business looking to startsmall, it is a good idea to look for a web host with several levelsof plans so that you can expand your website more easily ifbusiness takes off and you need more space or functions. Manywebsite hosts have a free plan you can sign up for, with noobligation to upgrade if you don't want to. For personal and staticwebsites a free hosting plan might be enough, but as soon as youwant to expand with, for instance, a web shop, you will need toupgrade to a more feature rich paid plan. These can cost anythingfrom $1 a month, to $500 a year depending on provider and servicesoffered.
Free plans are good for checking out a web hostingcompany. If you are sure a simple website will be enough for yourbusiness for a while, a free plan will give you a chance to findout if you are comfortable with a web hosting company before yousign up for a paid plan anywhere.
Finding a good web hosting company with a freeplan can begin with an Internet search for "free web hosting". Thiswill bring up a number of free services, as well as some pageswhere web hosting companies are listed and, often, rated. As youcompare services, keep in mind how you might want to expand yourwebsite, and look for a company that provides everything you mightwant in the future.
What else do I need? Once you have designed your website, and chosenwhere to host it, you will need a domain name.
Domain Names
What is a domain name, and why do I needone? A domain name is your company's identity on theInternet. It is the address that will direct people to yourwebsite, and it is the one thing they will have to remember if theywant to return to, or direct others to, your website.
Without your own domain name, the address to yoursite will most likely be long and difficult to remember. If you arerunning a business, no matter how small a domain name likewww.yourcompanyname.com, is seen as more professional thanwww.yourhostingcompany.com/yourcompanyname. Some hosting providers,especially if they are also your Internet provider, may use acustomer number instead of your company name, giving your website adomain name like www.yourhost.com/~u6789957896. Try rememberingthat when you want to tell someone where your website is.
So how do I get a domain name? Many hosting providers will register your domainname on your behalf as part of a paid plan. But if you are startingwith a free plan, you will have to register your chosen domain nameyourself.
As with web hosting companies, a search on theInternet will show up many companies that will register your domainname for you. Most of these also offer hosting, but many of them donot require you to host with them for them to register your domainname for you. A .com domain name, the most common Top Level Domainon the Internet, will usually cost no more than $10 a year.
When you choose a Domain Registration Service themost important thing to remember is to make sure the companyregisters the domain name in your name, not in theirs. That way,you keep the name no matter where you host your website and nomatter how many times you change hosts. You will also need accessto the control panel, so that all you need to do make sure theaddress always directs your customers to your site is to update thehosting details in the control panel.
Is that all? Finding the right website designer or designsoftware, the right web hosting company, and the right DomainRegistration Service will take time and research. But when you areplanning the future face of your company, every little bit ofeffort will pay off. It is not easy, but it is possible.
Good luck! I wish you, and your company, everysuccess.