There are many different varieties of rice. They differ in amounts of nutrition and, more importantly, the type of starch. There are two types of starch in rice: amylose and amylopectin. Amylose is a long, straight starch molecule that does not gelatinize during cooking (think of making gelatin), so rice which contains more of this starch tends to cook fluffy, with separate grains. Long grain white rice has the most amylose and the least amylopectin, so it tends to be the fluffiest and least sticky. Amylose also hardens more when cool, joining tightly together and forming crystals that melt when the rice is reheated. Rice that is high in amylose has a lower Glycemic Index number.

Amylopectin is a highly branched molecule that makes the rice sticky when it's released from the grain during cooking. Medium grain rice has more amylopectin, making it a good candidate for risottos, salads and rice pudding, which are served cold. And short grain rice has even more amylopectin and little to no amylose, so it's used most often for Asian cooking, when you want grains to be sticky so they are easier to eat with chopsticks. Then there's glutinous rice, which is very sticky when cooked, with the highest amount of amylopectin and no amylose.

White rice has the hull and bran removed, diminishing its nutritional content. But in the U.S., rice is generally enriched, with nutrients like calcium, riboflavin, iron, and niacin added. Brown rice has just the hull removed, so it has more fiber and nutrition. Converted rice is boiled or steamed before it is processed, which forces some vitamins and minerals into the kernel from the bran. Converted rice is higher in nutrients than plain white rice. And wild rice is not a grain, but a seed of a grass native to North America.

When rice cooks, the heat and liquid start permeating the surface of the rice. The starch molecules inside the rice grains start breaking down and absorb water to form a gel. The type of starch in the rice determines whether it will be fluffy or sticky.




When selecting rice, it is important to understand the classifications of rice in order to purchase the type or variety of rice that best suited for a particular recipe. Rice is classified according to many different characteristics and all varieties of rice can be categorized using any of the methods of classification.


Some of the short-grain rice varieties described below are actually considered medium-grain in the United States according to the length-width ratio used for classifying rice grains. However, some of the varieties are included here because they are universally referred to as short-grain rice in famous recipes (risotto and paella, for example) by cooks and food experts in all parts of the world, including the United States.

Arborio rice, which is named after a town in northwest Italy, is one of the most popular rice varieties used for risotto, a creamy Italian rice dish. (The rice is sauteed in butter and onions and is then cooked in stock, which is added to the rice in small portions to allow the rice to absorb the liquid gradually. The rice is stirred constantly, releasing the starch in the rice, which acts as a thickener and results in a very creamy dish that is finished with the addition of grated hard cheese and butter.)

Baldo rice is used in much the same way as Arborio for creating risotto, a creamy Italian rice dish. The grains are stickier than other popular varieties of rice that are often used for risotto, such as Arborio, carnaroli, and vialone nano.

Bahia is a popular short-grain rice from Spain that is often used for Spanish paella recipes. It is most often available in specialty shops and through mail order suppliers.

Bamboo rice is an aromatic short-grain white rice from China, which has been infused with the chlorophyll taken from young bamboo plants. As the rice is milled, the chlorophyll is added, making the rice high in vitamin B. Bamboo rice can be served as a risotto, as a sushi rice, as a side dish with fish or pork, or as an ingredient in rice desserts.

A short-grain variety of rice, grown in the Himalayan Mountains, which has a brown and ivory colored kernel. When cooked, the rice has a nutty flavor that may overpower less flavorful ingredients. It is available in Asian markets, specialty shops, and through mail order suppliers.

Bomba rice is a Spanish short-grain rice that when cooked, expands in width, which differs from most rice varieties that expand in length. It is able to absorb three times its volume in liquid so it is one of the best rice varieties for the preparation of popular Spanish paella recipes. When cooked, the grains remain separate and do not stick together. Bomba rice is expensive compared to other rice varieties due to the care required in cultivation and the length of time required for it to mature.

A short-grained Italian rice that features small plump grains, a high starch content, and a creamy texture when cooked. It is much like Arborio rice and both can be used in many of the same types of dishes. Because it retains its shape as it absorbs liquid during cooking, it is well suited for preparing the Italian rice dish, risotto.


A short-grain rice variety that is sticky when cooked. There are numerous varieties used for sushi or desserts. Pearl rice is also referred to as sweet rice, botan, Chinese sweet, glutinous, Japanese, mochi, sticky, or waxy rice.

Roma rice is another short-grain Italian rice that is excellent for the preparation of risotto. The rice has the ability to absorb a large volume of liquid and the grains remain separate and distinct. Roma rice is also used for creamy desserts, such as a variety of rice puddings.

The grains of Japanese sushi rice varieties are sticky when cooked making them easy to form into a shape for popular Japanese sushi dishes. There are several varieties of sushi rice and most are available in Asian markets and well-stocked food stores and some can be ordered through mail order suppliers.

A short-grain variety of rice that sticks together when it is cooked. There are numerous varieties used for home cooking and commercially for product formulations, converting the rice starch and flour into food binders for fillings, gravies, and sauces. The starch and flour do not separate in foods when they are frozen or thawed, making them an excellent option for frozen food formulations. When used for home cooking, sweet rice can be served with sushi or as dessert rice. Sweet rice is also referred to as botan, Chinese sweet, glutinous, Japanese, mochi, pearl, sticky, or waxy rice.


The following rice varieties are representative of some of the varieties classified as medium-grain in the United States, however they are classified as either short or long-grain throughout the remainder of the world.

A brand name for a spicy, aromatic rice blend that was developed in the United States. It is a combination of an Asian black short-grain rice and a medium-grain mahogany rice that were grown together in the same field. Black Japonicawas developed by the Lundberg Family Farms of California.

A medium-grain variety of rice from China that has a covering of black bran. When cooked, the rice has a distinctive nutty flavor, a slightly chewy texture, and the color becomes dark purple. Chinese black rice is also known as Emperor's rice and Forbidden rice because at one time it was the exclusive rice of the Chinese emperors.

A medium-grain variety of rice from Italy that is characterized by its black, charcoal, and rust colored grains. When cooked, the rice has a distinctive nutty flavor, a slightly chewy texture. It makes an excellent side dish when dressed with oil or butter, seasoned with salt and pepper, and topped with grated hard cheese. It is available through mail order or can be found in well-stocked food stores and Italian markets.

A medium-grain variety of rice that is cultivated in Indonesia. The rice is sold with only flecks of red bran covering the kernel so that some of the white kernel shows through. Indonesian red rice is one of many varieties of medium-grain red rice grown throughout the world.

A medium-grain variety of rice that is cultivated in Thailand. The rice is sold with much of the red bran covering the kernel so that only a hint of the white kernel is revealed. Thai red rice is one of many varieties of medium-grain red rice grown throughout the world.


A medium-grain rice variety that is cultivated in many areas of Spain, but takes its name from the province and city of Valencia, which is the largest rice growing region of Spain. It is slightly sticky when cooked and yet the grains separate easily, which makes it perfect for the popular Spanish paella dishes that originated in Valencia.


All of the rice varieties described below are universally referred to as long-grain varieties.

A long-grain rice that is approximately four times longer than it is wide. Basmati is one of the most popular long-grain rice varieties due to its fragrance, flavor, and texture. Much of the basmati rice is cultivated in India and Pakistan. The rice is fluffy and dry and the grains do not stick together after it is cooked. Steaming, boiling, and baking are excellent preparation methods for basmati rice, which can be used in pilafs, salads, and a variety of cooked dishes. Basmati rice combines well with sauces and curries.

A brand name for a long-grain rice that is approximately four times longer than it is wide. It is one of the most popular varieties in the United States and was first planted in the Carolinas during the 17th Century. It is now cultivated mostly in Arkansas, Texas, and California. Carolina rice is fluffy and dry when cooked and the grains do not stick together. Steaming and baking are excellent preparation methods for Carolina rice, which can be used in pilafs, salads, and a variety of cooked dishes. Carolina rice is also known as patna rice and it is available in many large food stores.

A long-grain variety of rice with red bran that is cultivated in Nepal. Himalayan red rice has a rich, nutty flavor and a deep red color when cooked. It is one of many types of long-grain red rice grown throughout the world. Himalayan red rice has a firm texture that makes it a good choice for salads and various pilaf recipes.

A long-grain unmilled variety of rice with red bran that is cultivated in India. Red rice has a nutty flavor and is reddish-tan in color. Red rice from India is one of many types of long-grain red rice grown throughout the world.

A variety of long-grain rice cultivated in Thailand. It is very fragrant and when cooked it is slightly sticky, but flavorful. It is often used for traditional Southeast Asian dishes and is also known as Thai fragrant rice, a name that applies to the jasmine fragrance provided when the rice cooks. It is available in both white and brown varieties.


A long-grain variety of aromatic rice developed in the U.S. that is considered to be similar to Basmati in taste and texture. It is served in Indian and Middle Eastern food dishes. Kasmati rice is available in well-stocked food stores, specialty shops, and through mail order suppliers.

A hybrid of basmati rice, pecan rice is ans aromatic variety cultivated primarily in the southern United States. It is available in white or brown varieties and when cooked, has a rich, nutty flavor with an aroma similar to popcorn. Pecan rice is available in well-stocked food stores, specialty shops, and through mail order suppliers.

A flavorful rice from South America. The grains are very long and thin. Surinam rice is highly sought after, but it is difficult to find in the United States.

A variety of Della rice, which is a cross between basmati and other long-grain rice varieties grown primarily in the southern United States. When cooked it expands widthwise, but maintains the same length. It is not as aromatic as basmati rice, but is more flavorful and aromatic than other long-grain rice from the U.S. It is a fluffy dry rice that does not stick together after it is cooked. Steaming and baking are excellent preparation methods for Texmati rice, which can be used in pilafs, salads, and a variety of cooked dishes.

A long-grain rice from Thailand that is actually a form of sticky rice, but because the black bran layers are not removed from the rice during processing, the rice does not stick together when cooked. Thai black rice has a sweet nutty flavor and like some other varieties of black rice, it develops a purple color when cooked. In Thailand, it is usually not eaten as part of the main meal, but is instead sweetened with sugar and coconut milk and used as a dessert or snack. It is very filling, so it is usually eaten in small quantities.

A brand name for a domestic aromatic long-grain rice that is generally sold as an unpolished or brown variety. When cooked, the rice opens and splits, similar to wild rice. The flavor is slightly sweet and nutty with a popcorn-like aroma. Wehanirice was developed by the Lundberg Family Farms of California.

Although wild rice is not technically a type of rice, it is used as one. True lake rice is manually harvested, making it quite expensive. Wild rice grains harvested from the lakes of Minnesota are of varying lengths and colors and usually vary from one body of water to another. The grains of Canadian wild rice tend to be longer and are often referred to as jumbo Canadian wild rice. Cultivated wild rice (the type most commonly found in food stores) is less expensive, but it is grown in controlled paddies.




What makes this rice distinct from Cantonese fried rice is that the individual grains of rice are cooked in the egg, and soy sauce, oyster sauce or other seasonings are not added. Cooked ham can be used in place of the roast pork.

Serves 4 to 6

3 large eggs
6 ounces roast pork
4 ounces frozen medium shrimp
Shrimp Seasonings:
Salt and freshly ground black pepper, to taste
1/2 teaspoon cornstarch
Other:
5 tablespoons oil for stir-frying, or as needed
1 medium yellow onion, diced
1/2 cup peas, fresh or frozen (if using frozen peas, thaw first)
4 cups cold cooked rice

Lightly beat the eggs and set aside. Dice the barbecued pork. Rinse the shrimp under warm running water to thaw. Shell, devein, and finely chop. Toss the shrimp with the salt, pepper and cornstarch. Heat the wok and add 1 tablespoon oil. When the oil is hot, add the shrimp and stir-fry until they turn pink. Push the shrimp up to the side and add the roast pork. Stir-fry briefly, then remove both from the pan. Clean out the pan. Heat the wok and add 2 tablespoons oil. When the oil is hot, add the onion. Stir-fry until it begins to soften, then add the peas. Stir-fry until the peas turn bright green and remove from the pan. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in the wok. Add the cooked rice, stirring to separate the individual grains. Do not let the rice brown. Add the beaten egg, stirring so that all the rice grains are covered. Add the roast pork, shrimp, onion and vegetables into the pan. Mix everything together. Taste and season with extra salt and pepper if desired. Serve hot.




When deep-fried, crispy or sizzling rice adds the dramatic sizzle to Sizzling Rice Soup.

Given the importance of rice in Chinese culture, it's not surprising that even overcooked rice is put to use! Crispy rice is the hardened rice layer that sometimes forms at the bottom of the pot or rice cooker. While most of us have accidentally made crispy rice (also called rice skins or popped rice) at one time or another, chefs deliberately make it to use in classic restaurant dishes such as Sizzling Rice Soup.

The popularity of crispy rice comes from the crackling and popping sounds made when the deep-fried rice crusts come into contact with a hot liquid or sauce. In addition to soup, the crusts are used in stir-fries or deep-fries, where the rice crackles when hot sauce is poured over. But you don't have to wait until you're eating out or cooking dinner to enjoy Crispy Rice - like won ton, they make a tasty snack when deep-fried and sprinkled with a bit of sugar.

Asian markets sell pre-cooked rice cakes, but it's easy to make your own. One method is to cook a pot of rice, then remove the soft rice from the top and cook the rice at the bottom on low heat for another thirty minutes. However, for larger amounts baking is easier.


Preparation Time: 1 1/2 hours
Yield: 8 - 10 squares
Rinse 1 cup of long or medium grain rice.

In a pot, add 1 1/2 cups water (1 1/4 if using medium grain rice) to the rice and bring to a boil.

Cover and simmer on low heat for 30 minutes. Remove from burner and allow to cool.

While rice is cooling, preheat oven to 300 degrees Fahrenheit.

Place the rice on a baking sheet, making sure that it is about, but no more than, 1/4-inch thick.

Bake the rice for 50 - 55 minutes, until it is dry.

Cool and cut into 2-inch squares.

Store in a canister until needed. Do not freeze.

The rice is now ready to be deep-fried. The trick to using deep-fried crispy rice is to make sure that both it and the sauce or soup it is being added to are very hot. That way you will hear the crackling sounds. Unfortunately, this makes for a lot of last minute work - you can't deep-fry the rice crusts and then set them aside to add during the final stage of cooking. Instead, the rice should be deep-fried just before the dish is served, with the soup or sauce being kept warm during this time. Deep-fry a few at a time, turning constantly, until they turn brown and puff up (this will take only seconds). Drain on paper towels. Bring to the table, quickly pour the hot liquid over, and listen to the rice snapping and popping.

If not properly handled, cooked rice has the potential to grow a bacteria called Bacillus cereus. The following tips for preventing this come from Brad, a food service sanitarian from Michigan: "make certain the rice is completely dried, then rapidly cool, cut into squares, place into a canister and refrigerate for no more than seven days before use."




Chicken:
1 whole chicken, about 3 pounds
1 teaspoon salt
2 cloves garlic, peeled
4 slices fresh ginger, peeled
4 scallions, trimmed
about 12 cups water
2 tablespoons sesame oil
sliced tomatoes (garnish)
sliced cucumbers (garnish)
cilantro sprigs (garnish)
Chicken Rice:
2 cups long-grain rice
2 tablespoons peanut oil
5 shallots, peeled and minced
5 cloves garlic, minced
3-1/2 cups reserved stock from cooking Hainanese chicken
1/2 teaspoon salt

Wash chicken and remove excess fat. Rub the inside of the cavity with salt. Smash garlic and ginger slightly with the flat of a knife. Tie scallions into a knot. Place garlic, ginger, and scallions inside the chicken cavity. Bring the water to a boil in a pot large enough to hold the chicken. Add the chicken, breast-side down. Simmer, covered, 30-40 minutes, turning chicken halfway through the cooking process, until chicken tests done (juices from thigh should run clear when pricked with a fork). Carefully remove chicken, draining liquid from body cavity back into the pot. Reserve the stock to make chicken rice. Plunge the chicken into ice water for 5 minutes to stop the cooking process and tighten the skin. Drain, rub with sesame oil, and let cool to room temperature. To serve, chop chicken into bite-size pieces (the Chinese do this bone and all) and arrange on a platter. Garnish with sliced tomatoes, cucumbers, and cilantro sprigs.
To make the chicken rice, wash the rice and drain in a colander. Let stand 1/2 hour to dry.

Heat oil in a wok. Add the shallots and garlic. Stir-fry until fragrant. Add rice grains and stir-fry 3-4 minutes, until glossy and fragrant.

Transfer to a saucepan. Add the chicken broth and salt. Bring to a boil over high heat and boil until the liquid level evaporates to the level of the rice and steam holes appear. Turn heat to low. Cover and simmer 40 minutes. Serve with Hainanese chicken.

Serve with Chile Sauce



Long grain scented jasmine rice is very popular in Asian cooking. The trick is to use less water, so that the rice is really being steamed instead of boiled during the second half of the cooking process. Feel free to use scented rice to lend extra flavor to Chinese fried rice recipes.

Time Required: 35 minutes

Find a good brand of jasmine rice, from Thailand if possible
Rinse the rice once, moving your fingers through the rice, until the water runs pure without any milkiness. Drain. Place the rice in a pot. Add enough water to cover the rice by 3/4 inch. An easy way to measure the water is to use the knuckle test - the water should come up to the first joint of your knuckle. (For 1 1/2 cups rice, I use just over 1 3/4 cups water). Bring the rice to a boil, uncovered. Turn the heat down to the lowest setting. Cover and simmer until the rice is cooked through (about 20 minutes). Remove the rice from the heat and allow to sit, still covered, for at least 10 minutes. Fluff with chopsticks or a fork before serving.

Tips:

The amount of water to add can vary depending on the rice. New crop rice - rice grown in the same year - is not as dry and needs less water.
Cooking jasmine rice in a rice cooker can be tricky. Try reducing the amount of water called for in the rice cooker's directions - even to a 1:1 ratio if necessary.
1 1/2 cups jasmine rice gives about 3 1/2 cups cooked rice.
Cold jasmine rice is very good for making fried rice.

What You Need:

Jasmine Rice
Dish to Drain Rice
Pot for Cooking
Measuring Cup
Chopsticks or Fork




Plain cooked rice and stir-fried bok choy taste great on their own, but pairing them adds something extra. In this recipe for vegetable rice, adding stir-fried vegetables to steaming rice means the rice is nicely infused with their flavor. There are numerous variations on this eastern Chinese dish - for example, you can forego the mushrooms and add steamed Chinese sausages, or replace the bok choy with Chinese cabbage. It makes a very nutritious side dish that pairs nicely with cooked chicken, beef, or seafood, whether or not you're preparing a complete Chinese meal.

1 1/2 cups long grain rice
2 1/4 cups water
2 heads baby bok choy (about 5 ounces each)
2 - 3 large Chinese dried black mushrooms, softened
1 1/2 - 2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil for stir-frying, as needed
2 slices ginger
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1/2 teaspoon granulated sugar
Pinch (1/8 teaspoon) salt
2 tablespoons water
A few drops Asian sesame oil

To prepare Vegetable Rice:
Rinse the rice 2 or 3 times if you normally do so, and drain. Bring the rice to a boil, uncovered, at medium heat. While waiting for the rice to boil, prepare the vegetables. Separate the stalks and leaves from the baby bok choy; cut the stalks diagonally and the leaves across. Squeeze the softened mushrooms to remove excess water. Cut into thin slices. Heat the wok and add 2 - 3 teaspoons oil, as needed. When the oil is ready, add the ginger and stir-fry briefly, about 30 seconds, until aromatic. Add the sliced mushrooms and stir-fry for about 2 minutes. Push the mushrooms to the side and heat 2 - 3 teaspoons oil in the middle. Add the bok choy, adding the stalks first, and then the leaves. Stir in the soy sauce, sugar, and salt, and stir-fry on high heat for 1 minute. Add the water, cover the wok and simmer for about 2 minutes. Remove from the heat and stir in the sesame oil. Leave while finishing preparing the rice. When the rice comes to a boil, turn the heat down to medium-low. Place the lid on the pot, keeping it tilted to allow steam to escape. When you can see holes or "craters" on the rice, add the vegetables on top (remove the 2 ginger slices if desired). Put the lid on tight, turn the heat to low, and simmer for another 15 minutes. Stir the vegetables into the rice and fluff it up. Serve.




Everything is cooked in one pot in this version of Shanghai vegetable rice, an eastern Chinese dish. Steaming sausages on top of rice is a common Chinese cooking technique which gives the rice extra flavor. Deep red and thinner than regular sausages, you'll find prepackaged Chinese sausages (lop cheong) in Chinese supermarkets.

4 teaspoons peanut or vegetable oil, or as needed
1 teaspoon chopped fresh garlic
4 stalks regular sized bok choy with leaves, chopped roughly into 1-inch pieces (about 3 cups chopped)
1 1/2 teaspoons regular table salt or sea salt, or to taste
2 cups long grain rice
3 cups water
3 Chinese sausages, chopped into 1-inch pieces
1 tablespoon light soy sauce, optional

Heat the oil a large saucepan over medium heat (about 6 on the stovetop). Add the garlic and cook for a few seconds, then add the bok choy. Stir-fry the bok choy for a minute, sprinkle with the salt and continue cooking for 2 more minutes for a total cooking time of about 3 minutes (if you like, separate the stalks and leaves and cook the stalks first for a minute before adding the leaves). Add the rice and water and bring to a boil on medium heat (about 5 on the stovetop) Cook until the water above the rice has almost completely evaporated and you are starting to see holes or "craters" in the rice, (this will take about 10 minutes). Turn the heat down to low, add the sausages on top, and the soy sauce if using. Cover and cook on low heat for about 25 minutes, until the rice and sausage are cooked. Use a fork to fluff up the rice. Serve.

