Dangers of Asbestos

It is only in relatively recent times that some rather concerning health issues have pointed directly back to asbestos and its use in many fields. Asbestos' heat resistant strength was once highly prized by industry, and used to insulate everything from steam pipes to brake pad linings - before its dangers became well-documented.

Today, the use of asbestos in any form or product is banned world-wide. That's because mesothelioma, is a disease with no standard treatment and clearly linked to asbestos exposure which often results in an aggressive cancer of the lining around the lungs.

Who would have thought that all those people working closely with asbestos would have been exposed to such serious helath risks? Would they have continued working normally if they had known? The answer has to be a firm "no", and that is why legislation is in place to compensate the victims of this dreadful and painful life-threatning disease.

This is written in acknowledgemment of all the researchers who have delved so deeply into the subject of asbestos and the affect it has on those unfortunate enough to have been directly exposed. Many have suffered, but equally, many will be spared thanks to what we know today.
Asbestos

By Lynne Eldridge MD, About.com

Updated: July 2, 2008

About.com Health's Disease and Condition content is reviewed by the Medical Review Board See More About: lung cancer causes asbestos mesothelioma Definition: A group of fibrous materials used in insulation, fireproofing and building materials.

Exposure to asbestos is the leading cause of mesothelioma, a rare cancer involving the lining of the lungs.

Asbestos is a known human carcinogen. The use of asbestos was banned by the Environmental Protection Agency in 1989 but is still present in many structures built prior to that time.

Examples: Bill believes his mesothelioma was caused by his many years working in construction, removing insulation.
Mississippi Asbestos Resources Increase Font Size Print Article

Asbestos in Mississippi

The State of Mississippis proximity to the Gulf Coast was instrumental in the development of many industries during the twentieth century. Some of these industries later became known for their use of asbestos-based products. For example, oil from offshore rigs is processed in a number of refineries in Mississippi. Then, there are also a number of chemical companies with large installations in the state. Due to the fact that large amounts of heat are generated by fuel-driven steam plants, power plants are a likely source of asbestos exposure - this applies to any state.


Shipyards are also found along Mississippis riverfront and coast. Unfortunately, shipyard workers and ship crewmen held jobs that virtually guaranteed asbestos exposure, as ship engine rooms and pipe systems were heat-insulated with the material. About thirty percent of all U.S. mesothelioma victims are veterans, and many of those are former Navy personnel that either sailed or repaired Navy ships built before 1985, a key year in terms of new legislation.


Paper mills are also common in Mississippi like many of the southern states. Let's not forget the construction industry, which until the mid 1980s was using many asbestos-based products. Not only home insulation but flooring, ceiling tiles, roofing and plumbing fittings were manufactured with asbestos as a component or were coated with asbestos for insulating purposes. This exposed carpenters and plumbers who were building during the twentieth century, who suddenly found they were at high at-risk by way of their job descriptions for mesothelioma.

Asbestosis and mesothelioma cancer are the result of inhaling asbestos fibers. However, it takes twenty years or longer after asbestos exposure for the symptoms of mesothelioma to appear. Many of the victims are men and women who worked in these industries for years and then retired. Not surprisingly, tens of thousands of Americans have been affected. nLarge numbers have filed liability lawsuits against former employers and asbestos manufacturers.

Now it seems that residents of Mississippi have that option as well. The list below is a partial list of jobsites that are believed to be possible locations for asbestos exposure. So, if you worked in any one of them and are now having lung problems, contact your doctor without delay. Should you believe you have a case for compensation, feel free to contact us and we will see to it that your claim is filed and processed with all possible speed.



American Packing Booneville, MS
Mississippi Power & Light Cedar, MS
Tennessee Gas Transmission Coffeeville, MS
Hooker Chemical Plant Columbus, MS
Occidental Chemical Corp. Columbus, MS
Magers and Poole Baldwin, MS
Big M Aluminum Plant Batesville, MS
International Paper Company Batesville, MS
Rittners Industrial Enameling Bay St. Louis, MS
Harbison Walker Bay Springs, MS
Coast Shipbuilding Biloxi, MS

Southern Pipe and Supply Columbus, MS
Buckeye Cellulose Corinth, MS
Kimberly Clark Corinth, MS
Rudolph Wurlitzer Manufacturing Co. Corinth, MS
Southbridge Plastic Products Co. Corinth, MS
Corning Glass Corning, MS
Dupont Chemical Delisle, MS
Mississippi Power & Light Escatapawa, MS
ST. Regis Paper Co. Ferguson, MS
Georgia-Pacific Corp. Gloster, MS
Mississippi Power & Light Greenwood, MS
Mid-South Insulation Co. Greenwood, MS
U.S. Gypsum Greenville, MS
Mississippi Power Co, Gulfport, MS
Associated Piping & Engineering Co. Gulfport, MS
Industrial Steel and Machine Gulfport, MS
Mississippi Power Co. Gulfport, MS
Reichold Chemical Gulfport, MS
Reichold Chemical Handsboro, MS
Hercules Chemical Co. Hattiesburg, MS
Mississippi Power Co. Hattiesburg, MS
Wicht Insulation Company Hattiesburg, MS
International Paper Co. Hitches, MS
Allied Paper Jackson, MS
Mississippi Power & Light Co. Jackson, MS
Shell Oil Jackson, MS
Veterans Administration Hospital Jackson, MS
Mid-South Insulation Co. Jackson, Ms
Hamilton Manufacturing Co. Kosciusko, MS
International Paper Co. Kreole, MS
Continental Turpentine Laurel, MS
Hercules Chemical Co. Laurel, MS
Mason Electric Co. Laurel, MS
Masonite Corp. Laurel, MS
Laurel Compress Co. Laurel,MS
Baseboard Box Co Magnolia, MS
Flintkote Magnolia, MS
Cook Industries Marks, MS
Sun Oil Co. McComb, MS
Flintkote Meridian, MS
Jeff Anderson Regional Medical Center Meridian, MS
Georgia-Pacific Corp. Monticello, MS
St. Regis Paper Monticello, MS
South Mississippi Electric Moselle, MS
Halter Marine Moss Point, MS
H.K. Porter Moss Point, MS
International Paper Co. Moss Point, MS
Thiokol/Morton Chemical Moss Point, MS
Armstrong Tire & Rubber Natchez, MS
International Paper Co. Natchez, MS
Mississippi Power & Light Natchez, MS
Mississippi Testing Facility Inc. Nicholson, MS
Bechtel Corp. Pascagoula, MS
Chevron Oil Pascagoula, MS
Clark Seafood Company Pascagoula, MS
Chicago Bridge & Iron Pascagoula, MS
Coastal Chemical Pascagoula, MS
First Chemical Corp. Pascagoula, MS
General Electric Pascagoula, MS
Industrial Steel & Machine Pascagoula, MS
Ingalls Shipbuilding Corp. Pascagoula, MS
L&N Railroad Gulley Warehouse Pascagoula, MS
Litton Shipyard Pascagoula, MS
Mississippi Phosphates Pascagoula, MS
Mississippi Power Pascagoula, MS
Standard Oil Company Pascagoula, MS
Badham Insulation Company, Inc. Pascagoula, MS
Schaupeter Shipyard Pascagoula, MS
Shook & Fletcher Insulation Co. Pascagoula, MS
Mississippi Power Co. Petal, MS
Crosby Chemicals, Inc. Picayune, MSGeorgia Pacific Corp. Taylorsville, MS
Southern Pipe and SUpplyq Tupelo, MS
Transcontinental Pipeline Tylertown, MS
International Paper Co. Vicksburg, MS
Mississippi Power & Light Co. Vicksburg, MS
Southwest Potash Corp. Vicksburg, MS
Day Companies Waynesboro, MS
West Point Works West Point, MS
Babcock & Wilcox Co. West Point, MS
Coastal Chemical Corp. Yazoo City, MS
Mississippi Chemical Corp. Yazoo City, MS
Bechtel Corp. Port Gibson, MS
Amerada Hess Purvis, MS
Gulf Oil Purvis, MS
Hess Oil & Chemical Purvis, MS
Morrow Power Plant Purvis, MS
Pontiac Refinery Purvis, MS
Southland Oil Refinery Sandersville, MS
Trunkline Gas Co. Shaw, MS
St. Regis Paper Silver Creek, MS


Asbestos Related Deaths in Mississippi

In 2004 an analysis of asbestos-related deaths in this country from 1979 to 2001 was released based on death certificates reported to the government. According to the estimates of the researchers, Mississippi had 408 deaths due to asbestosis during that period. Also during that period there were mesothelioma deaths in the range of 204 to 363. The inexact figures for mesothelioma are due to the probability that some lung cancer deaths were not attributed to asbestos fibers and should have been.

In 1999 the federal government began tracking mesothelioma deaths carefully. Between 1999 and the end of 2004 there were one hundred reported deaths from mesothelioma. The wave of asbestos related deaths is not done, however; it is expected to remain the same on an annual basis or increase slightly in the near future.

Cancer Treatment in Mississippi

Recently the National Cancer Institute designated forty one cancer treatment and research facilities across the country as comprehensive cancer centers that will work with the Institute on implementing research for new cancer treatments. These centers will serve as resources for clinical trials of new treatments for various types of cancer, including mesothelioma. The nearest one to Mississippi is in Alabama :


UAB Comprehensive Cancer Center
University of Alabama at Birmingham
1802 Sixth Avenue South, NP 2555
Birmingham, Alabama 35294-3300
Tel: (205) 934-5077
Fax: (205) 975-7428

There is an excellent regional cancer facility in Pascagoula, the first of its kind in the state: Some Sobering Facts About Asbestos Used in Kershaw Homes

Widely used across the United States until the 1980s, asbestos could be found in domestic products and was avidly applied in construction materials, such as insulation, cements, roofing, and siding. Asbestos is a naturally occurring mineral composed of fibers that are flexible and soft, yet durable and very resistant to heat and fire. This unique combination of characteristics makes asbestos a very useful material in an endless variety of domestic and industrial applications. Though mankind has found many positive, productive, economic and deceivingly afeuses for asbestos, the natural mineral is extremely toxic and cancerous. According to the EWG Action Fund, 10,000 Americans die each year from asbestos-related diseases such as asbestosis and mesothelioma cancer. The northwestern region of South Carolina is abundant in naturally occurring asbestos (NOA), which is found in the state serpentine rock deposits. Serpentine rock is a metamorphic rock that forms from great pressure over time, and is commonly found along mountain ranges, which also formed from geologic pressure and immense amounts of time. Deposits of serpentine are found along the eastern slope of the Appalachian Mountain Range and the Piedmont, as well as in the Foothills region along the state boundaries with North Carolina and Georgia. Aside from the state naturally occurring asbestos, the toxic material made its way into industrial jobsites, such as shipyards and power generation plants, and into residential homes in the form of many construction materials. In Kershaw, one of the most common places to find asbestos is along the sides of older single-dwelling homes. Slate sidings, also known as asbestos siding or shingles, were a very popular and common siding material from the 1930s through the 1970s. Though asbestos siding is no longer in production, it remains on many homes in Kershaw and throughout the country. Though produced in many colors, the most common is white. During production, asbestos fibers are mixed with cement, and are thus typically well-bound when left untouched. When the asbestos siding is damaged in any way, through means such as removal, sawing, drilling, or driving a nail through the material, asbestos fibers may be released in the form of dust. Once released into the atmosphere, these microscopic fibers are easily inhaled and cannot be broken down or expelled by the body. Over time these fibers attack the body at a cellular level, causing inflammation and genetic damage, and may eventually lead to a variety of asbestos-related diseases, including mesothelioma. There seems to be a conflict of opinion on what to do with old asbestos siding, depending on the age of the material and its condition. If most of the siding is in good condition, there may be little to no threat to leave the material as it lies. But if just a few spot repairs are necessary, these should be done with great care as to not disturb the asbestos fibers. Since asbestos siding is no longer made, replacement siding for spot repairs is not available in the original asbestos form. However, a manufacturing company by the name of GAF Materials Corporation developed a fiber cement siding that is virtually identical in dimension and design to the original, but contains no asbestos. If slightly damaged, many do-it-yourselfers attempt to repair the siding, often by painting to seal any cracks to prevent future breakage. Some choose to remove the siding themselves, but this comes with the risk of damaging the siding and thus releasing asbestos fibers into the air. If the siding is quite damaged, it would be wise to hire a contractor licensed in asbestos abatement to achieve the ultimate safety in removal.

Dangers of Asbestos

In fact, it was well over a century ago that asbestos was seen as an ideal building material. It was an excellent insulator, fireproof, could be mined naturally and relatively inexpensive. Beginning at the turn of the 20th century, researchers began to see a correlation between the unusually large numbers of deaths and lung problems in mining towns with high asbestos exposure. In the twentieth century, around 30 million tons of asbestos was used in construction. Industrial sites, office buildings, schools, shipyards homes, and everyday items such as ironing boards, dryers, toasters, and low-density insulation products were all eager consumers of the material. During the 1930's, numerous and well-known medical journals published scientific studies that linked asbestos exposure to cancer. In 1935, the American Journal of Cancer published "Pulmonary Asbestosis: Carcinoma of the Lung in Asbesto-Silicosis." In 1955, scientists confirmed what they had long suspected; t here was an unmistakable connection between asbestos exposure and ingestine of asbestos fibers and the development of certain forms of lung cancer (what later came to be known as mesothelioma).
Despite the overwhelming evidence of asbestos exposure and health risks, manufacturers and companies continued its use for many of their projects. After all, it was abundant, cheap and had evolved as the standard in many industries. It seems highly probable that most manufacturers were aware of the potential health risks of asbestos exposure but choose to ignore them. These same companies also ignored using safer alternative materials like fiberglass that were then under development. The victims were, for the most part, men of working families who had no knowledge of the potential health risks of asbestos exposure. They were also the bread-winners and had no option but to continue working. It was as early as 1929 the first lawsuits against the manufacturers and companies responsible for asbestos related cancer were brought about. Since then, numerous lawsuits have been filed against those responsible for asbestos use and proliferation. Many if these cases have resulted in large settlements for victims and the families of victims of mesothelioma from asbestos exposure.
Which Products Contain(ed) Asbestos? Asbestos-containing products are used to contain heat-otherwise known as thermal insulation. Most insulation materials before the mid-1970s did contain some degree of asbestos. Countless products have, at one time or another, contained asbestos, including (but not limited to): thermal seals, insulating cement, asbestos cloth, asbestos cement pipe, pipe-covering, refractory and boiler insulation materials, packing materials, fireproofing spray, transite board, gaskets, insulating block, joint compound, duct insulation for heating, vinyl floor tile, ceiling tile, adhesives, mastics, coatings, roofing products, acoustical textures, insulated electrical wire and panels, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, and brake and clutch assemblies.
What Dangers of Asbestos Still Pose a Health Risk? Asbestos exposure continues to be a health risk because it may still be part of buildings and products that were built decades ago. Asbestos-containing products may still be in industrial facilities, buildings, ships, and other structures and products where the fibers can become airborne. The ingestion of these fibers is the cause of malignant mesothelioma.
More importantly, malignant mesothelioma can develop up to 40 years after the initial asbestos exposure. The incidence of mesothelioma rises with the intensity and duration of asbestos exposure. Cases have been documented of mesothelioma among people with very little asbestos exposure to the dangerous fibers. Many of those who are being diagnosed with mesothelioma today experiences asbestos exposure unknowingly during their time in the Navy many years ago. Tradesmen who have a risk of asbestos exposure and mesothelioma include: Insulators (also known as asbestos workers) Plasterers Shipyard workers and Navy personnel Electricians and mechanics Bricklayers, millwrights, carpenters, etc. Steel workers and refinery and other industrial workers Maintenance workers and laborers Boilermakers who constructed boilers filled with insulation Plumbers, pipe fitters, and steamfitters who worked in poorly ventilated compartments with large quantities of insulation If you or someone you know has a health risk associated with asbestos exposure, you're entitled to know your legal rights, contact an Asbestos Lawyer. What Exactly is Mesothelioma? Mesothelioma is a form of cancer that is almost always caused by previous exposure to asbestos. In this disease, malignant cells develop in the mesothelium, a protective lining that covers most of the body's internal organs. Its most common site is the pleura (outer lining of the lungs and internal chest wall), but it may also occur in the peritoneum (the lining of the abdominal cavity), the heart, the pericardium (a sac that surrounds the heart) or tunica vaginalis. Most people who develop mesothelioma have worked on jobs where they inhaled asbestos particles, or they have been exposed to asbestos dust and fiber in other ways. Washing the clothes of a family member who worked with asbestos can also put a person at risk for developing mesothelioma. Unlike lung cancer, there is no association between mesothelioma and smoking. Compensation via asbestos funds or lawsuits is an important issue in mesothelioma (see asbestos and the law). The symptoms of mesothelioma include shortness of breath due to pleural effusion (fluid between the lung and the chest wall ) or chest wall pain, and general symptoms such as weight loss. The diagnosis may be suspected with chest X-ray and CT scan , and is confirmed with a biopsy (tissue sample) and microscopic examination. A thoracoscopy (inserting a tube with a camera into the chest) can be used to take biopsies. It allows the introduction of substances such as talc to obliterate the pleural space (called pleurodesis), which prevents more fluid from accumulating and pressing on the lung. Despite treatment with chemotherapy, radiation therapy or sometimes surgery, the disease carries a poor prognosis. Research about screening tests for the early detection of mesothelioma is ongoing. In Summary: Asbestos, Not a Pleasant Compound:
What is asbestos? (Technical)


Since asbestos fibers may cause harmful health effects in people who are exposed, all new uses of asbestos have been banned in the United States by the EPA. Check the toxicological profile for more information on the properties and uses of asbestos. It's the name given to a group of six different fibrous minerals (amosite, chrysotile, crocidolite, and the fibrous varieties of tremolite, actinolite, and anthophyllite) that occur naturally in the environment - and we call it: Asbestos One of these components, namely chrysotile, belongs to the serpentine family of minerals, while all of the others belong to the amphibole family. All forms of asbestos are hazardous, and all can cause cancer, but amphibole forms of asbestos are considered to be somewhat more hazardous to health than chrysotile. Asbestos minerals consist of thin, separable fibers that have a parallel arrangement. Nonfibrous forms of tremolite, actinolite, and anthophyllite also are found naturally. However, because they are not fibrous, they are not classified as asbestos minerals. Amphibole asbestos fibers are generally brittle and often have a rod- or needle-like shape, whereas chrysotile asbestos fibers are flexible and curved. Chrysotile, also known as white asbestos, is the predominant commercial form of asbestos; amphiboles are of minor commercial importance. Asbestos fibers do not have any detectable odor or taste. They do not dissolve in water or evaporate and are resistant to heat, fire, chemical and biological degradation. Because of these properties, asbestos has been mined for use in a wide range of manufactured products, mostly in building materials, friction products, and heat-resistant fabrics. What happens to asbestos when it enters the environment? Asbestos fibers do not evaporate into air or dissolve in water. However, pieces of fibers can enter the air and water from the weathering of natural deposits and the wearing down of manufactured asbestos products. Small diameter fibers and fiber-containing particles may remain suspended in the air for a long time and be carried long distances by wind or water currents before settling. Larger diameter fibers and particles tend to settle more quickly. Asbestos fibers are not able to move through soil. They are generally not broken down to other compounds in the environment and will remain virtually unchanged over long periods. However, the most common form of asbestos, chrysotile, may have some minor mineral loss in acidic environments. Asbestos fibers may break into shorter pieces or separate into a larger number of individual fibers as a result of physical processes. When asbestos fibers are breathed in, they may get trapped in the lungs. Levels of fibers in lung tissue build up over time, but some fibers, particularly chrysotile fibers, can be removed from or degraded in the lung with time. Please see the toxicological profile for more information on the behavior of asbestos in the environment.

How might I be exposed to asbestos? Asbestos minerals are widespread in the environment. They may occur in large natural deposits, or as contaminants in other minerals. For example, tremolite asbestos may occur in deposits of chrysotile, vermiculite, and talc. Asbestos may be found in soil that is formed from the erosion of asbestos-bearing rock. You are most likely to be exposed to asbestos by breathing in asbestos fibers that are suspended in air. These fibers can come from naturally occurring sources of asbestos or from the wearing down or disturbance of manufactured products including insulation, automotive brakes and clutches, ceiling and floor tiles, dry wall, roof shingles, and cement. However, these products do not always contain asbestos. Low levels of asbestos that present little, if any, risk to your health can be detected in almost any air sample. For example, 10 fibers are typically present in a cubic meter (fibers/m3) of outdoor air in rural areas. (A cubic meter is about the amount of air that you breathe in 1 hour.) Health professionals often report the number of fibers in a milliliter (mL) (equivalent to a cubic centimeter [cm3]) of air rather than in a cubic meter of air. Since there are one million cm3 (or one million mL) in a cubic meter, there typically would be 0.00001 fibers/mL of asbestos in air in rural areas. Typical levels found in cities are about 10-fold higher. Close to an asbestos mine or factory, levels may reach 10,000 fibers/m3 (0.01 fibers/mL) or higher. Levels could also be above average near a building that contains asbestos products and that is being torn down or renovated or near a waste site where asbestos is not properly covered up or stored to protect it from wind erosion. In indoor air, the concentration of asbestos depends on whether asbestos was used for insulation, ceiling or floor tiles, or other purposes, and whether these asbestos-containing materials are in good condition or are deteriorated and easily crumbled. Concentrations measured in homes, schools, and other buildings that contain asbestos range from about 30 to 6,000 fibers/m3 (0.00003-0.006 fibers/mL). People who work with asbestos or asbestos-containing products (for example, miners, insulation workers, asbestos abatement workers, and automobile brake mechanics) without proper protection are likely to be exposed to much higher levels of asbestos fibers in air. In addition, custodial and maintenance workers who are making repairs or installations in buildings with asbestos-containing materials may be exposed to higher levels of asbestos. Since vermiculite and talc may contain asbestos, occupational workers and the general population may be exposed to asbestos when using these products. You can also be exposed to asbestos by drinking asbestos fibers that are present in water. Even though asbestos does not dissolve in water, fibers can enter water by being eroded from natural deposits or piles of waste asbestos, from asbestos-containing cement pipes used to carry drinking water, or from filtering through asbestos-containing filters. Most drinking water supplies in the United States have concentrations of less than 1 million fibers per liter (MFL), even in areas with asbestos deposits or with asbestos-cement water supply pipes. However, in some locations, water samples may contain 10-300 million fibers per liter or even higher. The average person drinks about 2 liters of water per day. Please see the toxicological profile for more information on how you could be exposed to asbestos.

How can asbestos enter and leave my body? If you breathe asbestos fibers into your lungs, some of the fibers will be deposited in the air passages and on the cells that make up your lungs. Most fibers are removed from your lungs by being carried away or coughed up in a layer of mucus to the throat, where they are swallowed into the stomach. This usually takes place within a few hours. Fibers that are deposited in the deepest parts of the lung are removed more slowly. In fact, some fibers may move through your lungs and can remain in place for many years and may never be removed from your body. Amphibole asbestos fibers are retained in the lung longer than chrysotile asbestos fibers. If you swallow asbestos fibers (either those present in water or those that are moved to your throat from your lungs), nearly all of the fibers pass along your intestines within a few days and are excreted in the feces. A small number of fibers may penetrate into cells that line your stomach or intestines, and a few penetrate all the way through and get into your blood. Some of these become trapped in other tissues, and some are removed in your urine. If you get asbestos fibers on your skin, very few of these fibers, if any, pass through the skin into your body. Please see the toxicological profile for more information on how asbestos enters and leaves your body.

How can asbestos affect my health? To protect the public from the harmful effects of toxic chemicals and to find ways to treat people who have been harmed, scientists use many tests. One way to see if a chemical will hurt people is to learn how the chemical is absorbed, used, and released by the body; for some chemicals, animal testing may be necessary. Animal testing may also be used to identify health effects such as cancer or birth defects. Without laboratory animals, scientists would lose a basic method to get information needed to make wise decisions to protect public health. Scientists have the responsibility to treat research animals with care and compassion. Laws today protect the welfare of research animals, and scientists must comply with strict animal care guidelines. Information on the health effects of asbestos in people comes mostly from studies of people who were exposed in the past to levels of asbestos fibers (greater than or equal to 5 in length) in workplace air that were as high as 5 million fibers/m3 (5 fibers/mL). Workers who repeatedly breathe in asbestos fibers with lengths greater than or equal to 5 may develop a slow buildup of scar-like tissue in the lungs and in the membrane that surrounds the lungs. This scar-like tissue does not expand and contract like normal lung tissue and so breathing becomes difficult. Blood flow to the lung may also be decreased, and this causes the heart to enlarge. This disease is called asbestosis. People with asbestosis have shortness of breath, often accompanied by a cough. This is a serious disease and can eventually lead to disability or death in people exposed to high amounts of asbestos over a long period. However, asbestosis is not usually of concern to people exposed to low levels of asbestos. Changes in the membrane surrounding the lung, called pleural plaques, are quite common in people occupationally exposed to asbestos and are sometimes found in people living in areas with high environmental levels of asbestos. Effects on breathing from pleural plaques alone are usually not serious. There is conflicting evidence as to whether their presence in a person accurately predicts more serious disease development in the future. Asbestos workers have increased chances of getting two principal types of cancer: cancer of the lung tissue itself and mesothelioma, a cancer of the thin membrane that surrounds the lung and other internal organs. These diseases do not develop immediately following exposure to asbestos, but appear only after a number of years. There is also some evidence from studies of workers that breathing asbestos can increase the chances of getting cancer in other locations (for example, the stomach, intestines, esophagus, pancreas, and kidneys), but this is less certain. Members of the public who are exposed to lower levels of asbestos may also have increased chances of getting cancer, but the risks are usually small and are difficult to measure directly. Lung cancer is usually fatal, while mesothelioma is almost always fatal, often within a few months of diagnosis. Some scientists believe that early identification and intervention of mesothelioma may increase survival. The levels of asbestos in air that lead to lung disease depend on several factors. The most important of these are (1) how long you were exposed, (2) how long it has been since your exposure started, and (3) whether you smoked cigarettes. Cigarette smoking and asbestos exposure increase your chances of getting lung cancer. Also, there is a scientific debate concerning the differences in the extent of disease caused by different fiber types and sizes. Some of these differences may be due to the physical and chemical properties of the different fiber types. For example, several studies suggest that amphibole asbestos types (tremolite, amosite, and especially crocidolite) may be more harmful than chrysotile, particularly for mesothelioma. Other data indicate that fiber size dimensions (length and diameter) are important factors for cancer-causing potential. Some data indicate that fibers with lengths greater than 5.0 are more likely to cause injury than fibers with lengths less than 2.5 . (1 is about 1/25,000 of an inch.) Additional data indicate that short fibers can contribute to injury. This appears to be true for mesothelioma, lung cancer, and asbestosis. However, fibers thicker than 3.0 are of lesser concern, because they have little chance of penetrating to the lower regions of the lung. The health effects from swallowing asbestos are unclear. Some groups of people who have been exposed to asbestos fibers in their drinking water have higher-than-average death rates from cancer of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. However, it is very difficult to tell whether this is caused by asbestos or by something else. Animals that were given very high doses of asbestos in food did not get more fatal cancers than usual, although some extra nonfatal tumors did occur in the intestines of rats in one study. Several government offices and regulatory agencies have considered all of the evidence regarding the carcinogenicity of asbestos. The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) has determined that asbestos is known to be a human carcinogen. The EPA has determined that asbestos is a human carcinogen. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has determined that asbestos is carcinogenic to humans. Please see the toxicological profile for more information on how asbestos can affect your health.