Soloflex's Advantages It's easy to assemble. The beauty of the Soloflex is that it has only two basic parts to worry about and it's assembled with only one single bolt. The Soloflex is also easy to use and operate. No cables to bother you.
This piece of home gym equipment can also easily adapt to use freeweights. This is something you cannot do with the Bowflex - the Soloflex is more like classic weight lifting machines than the Bowflex is.
The Soloflex comes with 425 pounds of weight straps. You can even add another whopping 500 pounds of weight to bring the total of 900 pounds.
5. The Soloflex is a quality home fitness machine made of heavy steel. It's one of the most rugged home gyms I have come across. Disadvantages With only two models available, the Classic Soloflex ($1,600) and the Soloflex with Attachments ($1,950) ,you'll have no choice but to spend well over a grand to get this machine. The weight straps are problematic in the long run. The rubber bands are going to stretch as you use them, and the resistance will lessen. The smaller straps can even break.
Limited pull-down weight. It's impossible to put more weight onto pull down exercises for more resistance.

Now it's time to check out what the Bowflex can offer...
Bowflex's Advantages

1. Ease of use and operation. Changing exercises and resistance with the Bowflex is very simple and uncomplicated.

2. A wide variety of exercises in one compact machine because it has over 60+ exercises to choose from. With many Bowflex models, you will have a great time varying up your exercise routine giving yourself a highly balanced workout.


3. Different models to suit different tastes. Whether you're a beginner or experienced exercise enthusiast, Bowflex has a model that fits you. Bowflex also has models to fit your budget, and you don't have to break the bank if you don't want to.


4. Home gym fitness equipment from Bowflex is great for someone who has limited space. It can be folded up and placed right into a closet. Space saving design. Disadvantages

1. Price. Some Bowflex models like the Bowflex Revolution fetch a high price tag at over $2,000+ because there are cheaper ones you can go for instead.

2. Not for professional weight lifters. For people who are looking to bench press 500 plus pounds, the Bowflex is probably going to seem like a toy to you. Home gyms like these are mainly oriented towards the average person who just wants to stay fit and in shape. - In Conclusion...

Whatever home gym fitness equipment you decide to go with, remember that you can save a significant amount of cash if you opt for used home gym equipment. As you can see in this comparison, both home gym machines have their advantages and disadvantages over each other. The choice will depend on your specific lifestyle and tastes.


Nautilus Direct Announces Recall of Bowflex Power Pro Fitness Machines-January 29, 2004


Nautilus Direct (doing business as Bowflex), of Vancouver, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 420,000 Bowflex fitness machines to address two safety issues :

- First, while being used in the incline position, the machine's backboard bench can unexpectedly collapse and break, posing a risk of injury to the user.

- Second, the "Lat Tower," can rotate forward and fall during use,posing a risk of injury to the user.


UNITS: Bowflex Power Pro XL, XTL and XTLUsystems with the "Lat Tower" attachment. The "Lat Tower"attaches to the back of the bench, and has pull-down pulleys attached.

Description: The name"Bowflex" and the model name are printed on the front of the machine.The machine has 10 to 14 resistance rods that extend about 48-inches high and abackboard bench that is about 36-inches long. The recalled fitness machines were made in China, Taiwan and the U.S.A.

Sold at: Infomercials and specialized retail stores nationwide sold the fitness machines from January 1995 through December 2003 for between $1,200 and $1,600.

Consumers should stop using the backboard bench in the incline position and "Lat Tower" on the fitness machines immediately and contact.