Born on December 23, 1867, Madam C.J. Walker May 25, 1919) was a renowned American businesswoman, hair care entrepreneur, tycoon and philanthropist . She died after World War I, on May 25, 1919.
She made her fortune by developing and marketing a hugely successful line of beauty and hair products for black women, under the company she founded Madam C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company. The Guinness Book of Records cites Walker as the first female, black or white, who became a millionaire directly by her own achievements. In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Madam C. J. Walker on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans. Contents 1 Biography 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links

Biography Born Sarah Breedlove in Delta, Louisiana, she was the first member of her family to be born free. Her parents had been slaves. At age 14, she married a man named Moses McWilliams, but was widowed at age 20. Moving to St. Louis, Missouri to join her brothers, Sarah worked as a laundress for as little as a dollar and a half a day. She was able to save enough to educate her daughter. While resident in St. Louis, she joined St. Paul's African Methodist Episcopal Church , and this helped develop her speaking, interpersonal and organizational skills. She re-married in 1894 to John Davis and divorced him some nine years later. XXX
When she began to lose her hair, she had the idea for a line of hair care products. Like that of most other Americans in the early 1900s, Walker's home lacked indoor plumbing, electricity and central heating. Like many women of that era, she washed her hair only once a month. As a result, she suffered from severe dandruff and scalp disease that nearly caused her to go bald. In 1905, Davis moved to Denver, Colorado , where she worked as a sales agent for Annie Malone, another black woman entrepreneur who manufactured hair care products. Sarah also consulted with a Denver pharmacist, who analyzed Malone's formula and helped Walker formulate her own products. In addition, she often told reporters that the ingredients for her "Wonderful Hair Grower" had come to her in a dream. In 1906 she married Charles Joseph Walker, a St. Louis newspaperman, and changed her name to "Madam C.J. Walker". She founded the Madam C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company to sell hair care products and cosmetics. Madam Walker divorced Walker in 1910 and moved her growing manufacturing operations from St. Louis to a new industrial complex in Indianapolis . By 1917 she had the largest business in the United States owned by a black person.
I am a woman who came from the cotton fields of the South. From there I was promoted to the washtub. From there I was promoted to the cook kitchen. And from there I promoted myself into the business of manufacturing hair goods and preparations...I have built my own factory on my own ground.[2]

There is no royal, flower-strewn path to success. And if there is, I have not found it for if I have accomplished anything in life, it is because I have been willing to work hard.[2]
Walker saw her personal wealth not as an end in itself, but as a means to promote economic opportunities for others, especially black people. She took great pride in the profitable employment and alternative to domestic labor that her company afforded many thousands of black women who worked as commissioned agents. Her agents could earn from $5 to $15 per day in an era when unskilled white laborers were making about $11 per week.[3] Marjorie Joyner, who started work as one of her employees, went on to lead the next generation of African-American beauty entrepreneurs. Walker was known for her philanthropy, leaving two-thirds of her estate to educational institutions and charities, including the NAACP , the Tuskegee Institute and Bethune-Cookman College . In 1919, her $5,000 pledge to the NAACP's anti-lynching campaign was the largest gift the organization had ever received. Walker had a mansion called "Villa Lewaro" built in the wealthy New York suburb of Irvington on Hudson, New York, near the estates of John D. Rockefeller and Jay Gould. She spent hundreds of thousands of dollars on furnishings.[4] The Italianate villa was designed by architect Vertner Tandy, the first registered black architect in the state of New York, in 1915. Walker also owned townhouses in Indianapolis and New York. Madam Walker died on May 25, 1919, at age 51, at her estate Villa Lewaro. She passed away because of kidney failure and other complications resulting from hypertension. She was buried at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx. Her daughter A'Lelia Walker carried on the tradition of hospitality, opening her mother's home and her own to writers and artists of the emergent Harlem Renaissance. She promoted important members of that movement.[5] She converted a section of her Harlem townhouse at 108-110 West 136th Street into the Dark Tower, a salon and tearoom where Harlem and Greenwich Village artists, writers and musicians gathered. Poet Langston Hughes called her "The joy goddess of Harlem's 1920s" in his autobiography The Big Sea, because of the lavish parties she hosted in Harlem and Irvington.


Bundles's motivational speeches about Madam Walker and about her own career in television news have been well-received at several conferences and institutions, including the Smithsonian Institution, the Conference on Black Philanthropy, the Philadelphia Free Library, Harvard University, Princeton University, the United States Postal Service, the Council on Foundations, the Indiana Historical Society, the National Coalition of 100 Black Women, the National Archives, Detroit's Charles H. Wright Museum of African
American History, the New York Historical Society and the Chicago Public Library. A tireless keeper of her family legacy, Bundles spearheaded the national campaign which led to the 1998 United States Postal Service's Black Heritage Series stamp of Madam Walker. In 1992 her young adult biography, Madam C. J. Walker: Entrepreneur (Chelsea House, 1991), received an American Book Award from the Before Columbus Foundation and was named a Best Book for the Teen Age by the New York Public Library. Considered the authority on Walker's life, Bundles's essays and articles have appeared in
several encyclopedias, books and magazines. Most recently her writing has been featured in Fortune Small Business, Black Issues Book Review, Essence and Heart and Soul. She is a member of the boards of the Madam Walker Theatre Center and the Center on Philanthropy in Indianapolis and is the immediate past president of the Radcliffe Association at Harvard University. A graduate of Harvard and Radcliffe Colleges and of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, she is a member of Phi Beta Kappa.