Message from the President
Service. Leadership. Relevance in a global society. These values define our mission at American Public University System. They guide how we educate and support more than 40,000 distance learners studying in 50 states and 130 countries. They shape the growth of our two institutions, American Public University and American Military University. They are a roadmap for how we prepare you for successful careers.
How do we set ourselves apart from other distance learning and traditional brick-and-mortar universities?
Our programs, your career. Above all, we exist to serve you. Our students quickly discover a tight-knit community of professors, staff and fellow students. Lessons are creative, always demanding, and up-to-date with whats happening in the world today.
Youll engage in one-on-one discussions with professors. You may work on a class project with other students, or join online chats about your course work. Your classmates might live across town or across an ocean. The learning environment becomes fascinating, and lesson planning creative and relevant.
In fact, we commit ourselves to providing the best in career-relevant programs. We want to deliver an education that will enable you to make a real difference in todays world. We offer some of the nations best programs in homeland security, intelligence, criminal justice, emergency management and more. We offer an impressive curriculum, with more than 50 undergraduate and graduate degree programs.
The professors teaching these programs are truly real-world experts who incorporate knowledge they learn from the field. Many are executives in government, business and non-profit organizations, including the State Department, Department of Defense, Department of Homeland Security, CIA, Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the United Nations.
Join us Since our founding in 1993 as American Military University, weve grown to become a leader in distance education. And our students have always been the best of the best.
I encourage you to learn more about us. Talk to one of our students. Chat with a professor or department chair. Explore our web site. Find out how American Public University System is helping others - and how we can help you grow, achieve and succeed.
Wallace E. Boston, Jr. President and Chief Executive Officer



History
The American Public University System traces its history to June 11, 1991 when the American Military University (AMU)was established in the Commonwealth of Virginia. R etired Marine Corps Major James P. Etter founded AMU as a graduate school of military studies, in order to provide military officers with an opportunity to earn an advanced degree in a discipline associated with their profession.
AMU offered all its programs exclusively through distance learning. I t was, at that time, one of the first American degree-granting institutions that operated solely at a distance. This method accommodated the special needs of military students who moved often and served under uncertain conditions due to training, exercises, and extended deployments. Distance learning offered the flexibility and accessibility to study with an institution that they could contact 24/7 through mail, email, phone, and fax, from anywhere in the world and despite demanding conditions.
The University opened its doors in January, 1993, at offices in Manassas, Virginia. Eighteen graduate students registered for 22 courses in Land, Naval, or Air Warfare. AMUs curriculum was gradually expanded to include related disciplines such as Unconventional Warfare, Civil War Studies, Intelligence, Defense Management, and National Security Studies.
In June, 1995, AMU achieved accreditation with the Accrediting Commission of the Distance Education and Training Council. Through this national accreditation, AMU students became eligible for Department of Defense Tuition Assistance Programs, the Veterans Administration Entitlement Programs, and federal and corporate tuition reimbursement benefits.
Half a year later, in January, 1996, AMU introduced its undergraduate program with three initial areas of study: Military History, Military Management, and Intelligence Studies. These programs granted military personnel an opportunity to earn a relevant baccalaureate degree. Later , to fulfill the needs of service members seeking a two-year degree , AMU began offering an Associate of Arts degree in General Studies. The University continued to expand its curriculum in response to the needs of its students and the military. AMU now offers programs that range from Criminal Justice, Management, International Relations, Homeland Security, and Security Management, to Transportation and Logistics Management, Sports Management, Emergency and Disaster Management, as well as a full range of liberal arts programs that were introduced to meet the diverse interests and aspirations of the University's growing student body. With these new degree programs, AMU began attracting students from professions outside the military, primarily in public services such as law enforcement, fire and rescue, emergency planning, government, and defense contractors.
In 1998, AMU began transitioning its programs and services to an online format instead of the original correspondence format. This leveraged the 24/7 accessibility of online electronic classrooms, administrative services, and learning support facilities. At this time AMU also outsourced its bookstore and textbook fulfillment services to an industry leader, and began developing its proprietary student information system, Partnership At a Distance, or PAD. This system enables students to apply for admission, complete an online orientation, register for courses, check degree progress, and apply for graduation from the convenience of their home or office, with 24/7 access to these online services.
In 2002, AMU expanded into the American Public University System, establishing American Public University to serve the educational needs of the public service community. Adopting the slogan of "Educating Those Who Serve", the APUS Mission expanded to serve the nation's military and public service community with superior, relevant, and affordable distance learning programs which prepare them for leadership and service in a diverse, global society. With this organizational and mission expansion, the University System continued to expand and refine its curriculum to meet the special educational needs of its diverse student body.
APUS was established in West Virginia, located within the region accredited by the Higher Learning Commission (HLC) of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools (NCA). Accordingly, APUS began the process of achieving accreditation by the HLC leading to Candidacy status with the Commission in 2004, and eventual initial accreditation in May, 2006. APUS continues to maintain its national accreditation with the DETC, making it one of the few American institutions of higher learning to hold dual institutional accreditation with recognized accrediting bodies. Both the NCAs Higher Learning Commission and DETCs Accrediting Commission are recognized by the U.S. Department of Education and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation.
Today, APUS and its member institutions, American Military University and American Public University, serve more than 40,000 military and public service professionals with relevant distance learning programs. APUS serves students in all U.S. states and territories, and in more than 125 foreign countries. APUS is appropriately a wholly-owned subsidiary of a publicly-owned company, American Public Education, Incorporated which issued an initial public offering of its stock in November, 2007, and is now trading on the NASDAQ as APEI.




AMU is a top provider of higher education to adult learners, and offers more than 50 leading online undergraduate and graduate degree programs that prepare more than 20,000 civilian and military students for careers in homeland security, intelligence, IT management, business and beyond.

Convenience & Flexibility AMU accepts Federal Student Aid, Military Tuition Assistance, Veterans Administration (VA) and GI Bill benefits. Tuition at AMU is affordable at $250 per credit hour for undergraduate courses and $275 per credit hour for graduate courses. There are no book costs for undergraduates earning academic credit We will accept up to 90 transfer credits toward a bachelor degree and up to 15 hours toward a master degree Relevant Programs and Leading Edge Faculty AMU offers more than 50 degree programs, including specialized curriculums that meet the needs of professionals in the national security and public safety sectors. Our professors have leadership experience in key government, business and non-profit organizations, including the Department of Homeland Security, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Accreditation AMU is a member institution of the American Public University System, which is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission, North Central Association (www.ncahigherlearningcommission.org, 30 North LaSalle Street, Suite 2400, Chicago, IL 60602; 800.621.7440) and the Accrediting Commission, Distance Education and Training Council (www.detc.org, 1601 18th St., NW, Washington, DC 20009; 202.234.5100)
Get started today. AMU has open enrollment and no application fee. Call our Admissions Team at 1-877-468-6268


Admissions
All our courses are online, so you have the flexibility of taking classes any time or any place that fits your schedule. Our degree programs are designed to be challenging and relevant to working adults in both the public and private sectors, and can help enhance your current career or prepare you for a career change.
Students come to AMU from around the globe with varying educational backgrounds, and diverse educational and career goals.
First-time College Student



If you are a first-time college student, youll be applying for admission to one of our undergraduate programs.

Associate Degrees

The General Studies degree is designed to provide a solid foundation for further academic achievement. Discipline specific Associate degrees provide students an opportunity to focus on courses that develop knowledge, skills, and abilities that are readily applicable to the students personal or professional interests.

When you enroll in the Associates degree program you must also enroll in COLL100 / RQ295 Foundations of Online Learning as your first course.

Bachelor's Degree

The Bachelor's Degree program is open to students who possess a high school diploma or its equivalent. This minimum 120-124 credit hour program is the standard four-year undergraduate degree desired by most employers and prepares the student for graduate study.

Undergraduate Certificates

AMU offers certificate programs at the undergraduate level to applicants who have a high school diploma or its equivalent. Certificate programs allow students to focus on a particular topic of interest through a five- to nine-course program of study. Students choosing certificate programs usually have either an Associate or Bachelors degree and seek specific knowledge in one subject area.

Note : Students pursuing Undergraduate Certificates may not use Federal Student Aid to finance their program.



Our 5-step admissions process will allow you to apply for admission, complete your new student orientation, request a transfer credit evaluation, apply for Federal Student Aid, and register for classes.




Choosing Your Academic Program

Selecting the right degree plan is a key step in ensuring a smooth admissions process and a successful educational experience. Many students are unsure which program to choose and where to begin. Our Admissions Representatives can help you make this important decision. To speak with an Admissions Representative, call 1-877-777-9081 or email us atinfo@apus.edu

Tips for Successful Degree Selection

As youre browsing the degree program pages, keep these tips in mind: Associate and bachelor level programs are both undergraduate degrees Though it seems logical to earn an Associate degree first and then go on to the BA, that may not always be the best choice Keep your end goal in mind; choose the degree that best matches your career goals; this may not be the one that nets you the most in transfer credit Once you've narrowed your options, talk with an Admissions Representative; he or she can assist you in getting a preliminary evaluation of your previous transcripts so you can make a more informed choice
Admission Requirements

First-time college students are admitted upon completion of the online application and orientation. You may then register for your first course(s).

Transfer Credit for First-time College Students

All students with American Council on Education (ACE)-evaluated military or professional experience and education that you need to have evaluated for credit should submit a Transfer Credit Evaluation (TCE) form and supporting documentation. AMU will consider military or civilian training evaluated by the ACE as well as approved examinations, such as the College Level Examination Program (CLEP). For full instructions on TCE, please click here.

Note : Undergraduate students who apply at the Associate level may transfer up to a maximum of 45 credit hours; those applying at the Bachelor's level may transfer up to 90 credit hours. Students with no prior college experience may have their ACE-evaluated military or professional experience considered for transfer credit. Mail or Fax Admissions and Transfer Credit Documents to the following: American Public University System 10110 Battleview Parkway, Suite 114 Manassas, VA 20109 Attn: Student Records Admissions Fax: 304 724 3787 Transfer Credit Fax: 304 724 3788


APUS complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and state and local requirements regarding students with disabilities. In compliance with federal and state regulations, reasonable accommodations are provided to qualified students with disabilities.
For more information about accommodations for students with disabilities, click here or contact us at dsa@apus.edu.
Have questions? Our Admissions staff is available Monday to Friday from 8am to 5:00 pm, EST to answer your questions and provide assistance with the admissions process. You can reach us by phone at 1-877-777-9081, or email us at info@apus.edu.

