Animal Cuts is an uncompromising "cutting" supplement that has been designed to produce professional results for bodybuilding competitions. Unlike most conventional fat burners out there, Animal Cuts is more than just a thermogenic.



Whether you're preparing for a show or just trying to get in top condition, you need the raw power of Animal Cuts because it is a comprehensive and complete formula. It might contain ephedrine, caffeine, possibly an aspirin-derivative, and a few other ingredients sprinkled in. Make no mistake about it - this is a thermogenic product and only a thermogenic product.

Finally, Animal Cuts incorporates three additional components designed to optimize the body's overall ability to reduce fat and increase vascularity. Nucleotides and neurotransmitters help keep your energy levels high and maintain the proper brain chemistry. Combined with our proprietary Animal Cuts Complex", this product can help reduce appetites, carb and sugar cravings, and bingeing while maximizing carb metabolism.




Thermogenic formula from Universal contains a proprietary formulation of 28 active ingredients. Each container holds 42 individual single serving packs.



These basic ingredients make up the classic E/C/A stack that most people find effective (up to 95% of all fat burners are based on this model). But the fact is, the E/C/A stack may not work well for everyone.

Maybe youve been on the E/C/A stack for a while now. Maybe you drink a lot of coffee in the morning and soda throughout the day. The human body can easily become desensitized to the ingredients in this stack after prolonged use, thus reducing its effectiveness. For some athletes, the problem may even transcend thermogenesis. Your problem, for instance, might be releasing stored bodyfat. Or maybe you have a sluggish thyroid (thyroid hormones directly control your bodys metabolism).

You might be insulin-resistant, a condition which makes it extremely difficult to shed bodyfat. Impaired neurotransmitter function can also make life difficult, encouraging bingeing. Perhaps your problem is not fat at all, but subcutaneous water weight. After all, you can come in with low body fat levels, but if you're holding subcutaneous water, you're cooked. The point is, athletes need to overcome many obstacles in order to achieve maximum cuts and separations. So if you've had little success with conventional 'fat burners' in the past, or if results have stopped coming, then don't be frustrated.

Nine distinct components make up the Animal Cuts:

Thermogenic complex Lipotropic complex Metabolic complex Diuretic complex Thyroid complex Insulin potentiators Nucleotide regulators Neurotransmitter regulators Special Animal Cuts Complex



Serving size: 2 packs

Servings Per Container: 21

Amount Per Serving: Niacin (as niacinamide) 15mg, Vitamin B6 (as pyridoxine HCL) 2mg, Thermogenic Complex 650mg: Cordia Salicifolia, Epigallocatechin Gallate (EGCG), Capsaicin, L-Theanine, PEA (phenylethylamine). Lipotropic Complex 75mg: Choline Citrate, Betaine HCL, Inositol Monophosphate. Metabolic Complex 900mg: Guarana (22% caffeine), L-Carnitine. Diuretic Complex 850mg: Theobromine, Dandelion Extract (taraxol, taraxerol), Uva Ursi Extract (arbutin, methyl-arbutin). Thyroid Complex 175mg: Guggul (2.5% guggulsterones), Soy Isoflavones. Insulin Potentiators 100mg: Alpha Lipoic Acid, Chromium Polynicotinate, Chromium Picolinate. Nucleotide Regulators 300mg: Phosphate, Inosine, Phosphatidylcholine. Neurotransmitter Regulators 250mg: St. John's Wort (0.3% hypericin), L-Tyrosine. Animal Cuts Complex 812mg: Citrilene (-HCA), Grapefruit Extract (naringin, naringenin), White Willow (bark), Phenylalanine, Ginger Root Extract (gingerols, Shoagols).

Other Ingredients: Green tea extract, cayenne extract, cocoa extract, potassium phosphate, magnesium phosphate, magnesium stearate, gelatin, stearic acid.




Recommended Usage: Take two packs daily for three straight weeks. You can take one pack immediately upon waking and the other one 4-6 hours later.

Follow a cycle consisting of three weeks on and one week off. After your one week off cycle, you can repeat another three week on cycle until you reach your goals. Take on an empty stomach.

Each pack contains 200mg of caffeine.

Warnings :
Not for use by those under the age of 18.
Do not use if pregnant or nursing.
Consult a physician before using this product if you have, or have a family history of: heart disease, thyroid disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, recurrent headaches, depression or other psychiatric conditions, glaucoma, difficulty in urinating, prostate enlargement, or seizure disorder, if you are using a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) or any other dietary supplement, prescription drug or over-the-counter drug containing pseudoephedrine, ephedrine or phenylpropanolamine (ingredients found in certain allergy, asthma, cold/cough and weight loss products).
Do not use if you are taking anti-depressants or other medication.
Use of these products may cause your skin to be extra sensitive to UV sources, such as artificial or natural sunlight. Avoid excessive exposures from these sources.
Discontinue use two weeks prior to surgery.


Date Added: 01-27-2009 Star Rating: one star
Comments: First of all, I noticed no energy from it like other fat burners I have used. Wih only 99 mg of caffeine per packet I now see why. With token amounts of everything else I wish I would have read the label better before I purchased. Also noticed no appetite suppression and zero weight loss from it will not buy again very dissappointed.

Date Added: 02-10-2008

Star Rating: 5 stars
Comments: This is a really good product. It the best I have tried and the most simple to stay with. "Good job Animal"



Comments: Results for the following 2 weeks were less than expected, but a lot higher than previous phases. I lose a total of 2.7 pounds. My total body fat % loss was around 2.6%, so I was extremely happy with the results. My fat free mass has barely changed, meaning I have burned off almost pure fat. This is something I had not done before. Usually I lose quite a bit of muscle during my cutting phases.



Mixed thought on the mix by R. Todd Woodstock
Comments: Used this in the past when trying to lose weight while incorporating a rigid workout. This product contains a lot of nutrients, which were great for my body, but I really never noticed weight loss from this product. I do like that it contained essential aminos for my type of workout regimen; however, that was the only thing that impressed me. Recommended only for the avid physically fit person.

Date Added: 03-31-2008 Star Rating: 3 stars
Comments: Good hunger suppresent but I experienced little weight loss. I only tried one bottle. Lots of pills to take, two packs a day for 21 days.



Comments: OK, let's get started. One of the first things I noticed was a small increase in energy. I didn't actually realize that Animal Cuts even had an energy booster, so I was quite surprised. This is handy because of the calorie deficit diet that I'm on means that I don't have a lot of energy to train.
Date Added: 11-19-2007 Star Rating: 5 stars
Comments: This product is awesome. I've tried many others and nothing compares to this one. I've lost over 32 pounds in 8 weeks. Of course diet and exercise is still a must in order to see great results. And the price is right !



5 out of 5 stars Great Product!!!! October 9, 2008 Comments: I have taken animal cuts for a while now and I love them! It's a great product that helps boost your weight loss along with working out. It works really well with animal pak too! The thing that stands out about this product is that it not only boosts your metabolism as well as other things, but it also reduces your water weight which makes a noticeable difference within the first week or so. I recommend it!



Animal Cuts by Stanimir Yordanov
Comments: I have tried many different products, and this one was one of them. There were no visible effects after I used it for about four months. I have noticed that it helped my muscles relax quicker, but that is just about it.
Write Review | Win Prizes



I'm on my 3rd cut now...the first one I used nothing, the second I used Animal Cut and it made stripper fat a whole lot easier! Pretty exp in my opinion, but if you want to cut down quickly it's still worth it. All the Animal range of products are decent...