Physical therapists use goniometers and inclinometers to help them measure a patient's range of motion. The therapist uses the goniometer by lining up the arms with the patient's bones that surround the joint they are wanting to assess. Generally, the joint must be assessed at both ends of the range of motion (ie. fully flexed and fully extended).Unlike the goniometer, the inclinometer does not require the therapist to align the device with the joint. To use the inclinometer, a therapist places the device in a predetermined starting position and zeros the device. The therapist then instructs the patient to move the joint through the full range of motion. The inclinometer then measures the final degrees of the range of motion of that joint

Flexibility doesn't get the same attention given to other dimensions of fitness but it is increasingly being found to be important for maintaining good functional movement and independence among the elderly. While the limitations of flexibility are more apparent in old age it is important to develop and maintain a flexibility program throughout your life to reduce risks of problems later on.

Several movement disciplines related to flexibility have gained increasing popularity with classes being taught at most health clubs and fitness centers. Yoga, Tai Chi, and Pilates are all great forms of exercise that will help improve flexibility, strength and balance. Yoga combines stretching, strengthening, breathing, and meditation. Tai Chi began in China as a form of martial arts, and it includes a series of postures with meditation. Pilates involves movements that are performed in a specific order for maximum stretching and strengthening.

Foam rollers are cylinder shaped foam pieces of varying densities that are now being widely used as exercise equipment as well as for rehabilitation. These rollers are used to improve flexibility, balance, and strength. They are becoming increasingly popular in yoga and pilates classes, fitness centers, and rehabilitation clinics. Some foam rollers even come with their own DVD for instructions and use at home.

1. Remove shoes and assume the position for the "backsaver toe touch'', except place the sole of the foot of the extended leg flat against the box or bench seat, and place the head, back, and hips against a wall; 90 degree angle at the hips.

. Place one hand over the other and slowly reach forward as far as you can with arms fully extended; head and back remain in contact with the wall. A partner will slide the measuring stick on the bench until it touches the fingertips.

Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF)
an advanced stretching technique that has been shown to maximize stretching gains.
Let the indiviual perform an active contraction against resistance. This contraction causes a reflex relaxation of the muscle that the individual is trying to stretch (hamstring). By applying a passive assist , it facilitates the subsequent stretching of the hamstring It is important to point out that there are a variety of PNF techniques. Because they involve some passive movements they should not be done without proper training, supervision, or assistance. Drop the left arm and raise the right arm to the side, palm down, fist closed. Rotate the trunk to the right as far as possible. The reliability will depends on the amount of warm-up allowed, and whether the same procedures are followed each time. Some norm values will be based on no previous warm-up, while others after a full warm-up. The best results will be achieved after a warm up or if the test is proceeded by a test such as the endurance test.

This test does not require specific testing equipment such as required for the similar sit and reach test. It is a easy and quick test to perform requiring minimal equipment.Variations in arm, leg and trunk length can make comparisons between individuals misleading.

The subject removes their shoes and sits on floor with the measuring line between their legs with the soles of their feet placed immediately behind the baseline, heels 8-12" apart. After three practice tries, the student holds the fourth reach for three seconds while that distance is recorded. Make sure there is no jerky movements, and that the fingertips remain level and the legs flat. Lower back flexibility is important because tightness in this area is implicated in lumbar lordosis, forward pelvic tilt and lower back pain. This tests only measures the flexibility of the lower back and hamstrings, and is a valid measure of this. The score is recorded to the nearest half inch as the distance before (negative) or beyond (positive) the baseline.

4. Zipper (Shoulder Flexibility) Raise your right arm, bend your elbow, and reach down across your back as far as possible. At the same time, extend your left arm down and behind your back, bend your elbow up across your back, and try to cross your fingers over those of your right hand. Measure the distance to the nearest half-inch. If your fingers overlap, score as a plus; if they fail to meet, score as a minus; use a zero if your fingertips just touch. Repeat with your arms crossed in the opposite direction (left arm up). Most people will find that they are more flexible on one side than the other. 6. Hamstring and Hip Flexor Flexibility Lie on your back on the floor beside a wall. Slowly lift one leg off the floor. Keep the other leg flat on the floor. Keep both legs straight. Continue to lift the leg until either leg begins to bend or the lower leg begins to lift off the floor. Place a yardstick against the wall and underneath the lifted leg. Hold the yardstick against the wall after the leg is lowered. Measure the angle created by the floor and the yardstick using a protractor. Your score is the angle measured for each leg. The greater the angle, the better your score. Repeat with the other leg.

Note: For ease of testing, you may want to draw angles on a piece of posterboard. If you have goniometers, you may be taught to use them instead.