Rock and Gem Shows

Sapphire, ruby, amethyst, garnets, bloodstone, emerald. If these words interest you, there must be a high possibility that you'll also be interested in attending a rock and gem show. After all, it is where you can see for yourself these stones and more. Albeit you can even take home a stone or two if you have enough budget for them.
Visit a Rock And Gem Show and be fascinated by a whole range of natural stone products from around the world.
Mostly, they are available at reasonable prices. There are spectacular mineral specimens, sparkling crystals of every colour and ancient fossils. Created from the natural products, there are beads, polished and carved stones and gold and silver jewelry inset with them. At several shows there is a Lapidary or Geology club, either cutting and polishing gemstones or showing their geological collections.
Experienced exhibitors are always happy to discuss the products available, whether it is where and how they were mined or how they were formed.
For young or old, experienced or novice, these are must-see events.
The Tucson Gem, Mineral & Fossil Showcase is one of the premier gem and mineral shows in the world. The event takes place annually in late January and February at approximately 40 to 49 different locations across the city of Tucson, Arizona. Most of the shows are open to the public, except for certain trade shows where you will need to register with your business license. There is not one single location for gems, minerals and fossils, but rather dealers occupy dozens of locations across the city: many big hotels and most motels are occupied for this occasion, with professionals displaying their specimens in such locations as hotel bedrooms, lobbies, tents, a nd lawns. The premier event of the Gem, Mineral & Fossil Showcase is the Tucson Gem & Mineral Show TM produced by the Tucson Gem and Mineral Society. This show has been held annually since 1955 and is now occupies 181,000 square feet (16,800 m2) of the Tucson Convention Center. All of the shows have attendees from all across the world which includes the general public, experts, beginning collectors, museum employees, dealers, retailers, and researchers. Many museums and universities, such as the Smithsonian Institution and the Sorbonne have displayed at the Tucson Gem and Mineral Show TM. The Tucson Gem and Mineral Show TM and all of these other different shows bring in over 110 million dollars to the local Tucson economy.
The Tucson Gem and Mineral Show TM is held at the Tucson Convention Center starting on the second Thursday of February. The first Tucson Gem and Mineral Show TM was held in an elementary school in 1955 and shortly there after moved to a quonset hut at the Tucson Fair Grounds. Then in 1973 they moved into the Tucson Community Center. They occupied the North Exhibit Hall first, then expanded into the Arena and upper Arena concourse. After the completion of the new facility in 1990, which is now called the Tucson Convention Center, the Tucson Gem and Mineral Show TM now occupies the Arena, Exhibition Halls A-B-C, Galleria and Ballrooms.
Shows in Tucson It is known that Tucson Show is a very big event for rock and gem enthusiasts. Here are some shows under it that you might be interested in. In the north part of the Valley a wonderful surprise awaits you. The Deer Valley Rock Art Center has been open to the public since 1994, but some people never knew it existed until the Phoenix Pride Commission named the Rock Art Center to the list of Phoenix Points of Pride in May 2000. It is also listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The Deer Valley Rock Art Center is operated by Arizona State University School of Human Evolution & Social Change. The land is leased to the University by the Flood Control District of Maricopa County, which owns the land. The building housing the indoor exhibits was built by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers as part of the agreement arising from the construction of the Adobe Dam in 1980.
The Deer Valley Rock Art Center is the location of the Hedgpeth Hills petroglyph site. There are more than 1,500 recorded petroglyphs on almost 600 boulders. Research is still being conducted on the 47 acre site.
A petroglyph is a marking carved into a rock usually using a stone tool. Some of the petroglyphs were made 10,000 years ago.
The petroglyphs at Hedgpeth Hills were made by American Indian people over a period spanning thousands of years.
Petroglyphs represent concepts and beliefs that were important to the people who carved them. Some of the petroglyphs may have religious significance. Occasionally you will see a series of carvings that might be telling a story of some kind. Some of the carvings are of animals and may relate to hunting. Petroglyphs are important because they represent a permanent record of people and their migrations.
Most rock and gem clubs put together yearly shows in order to raise money, show case members' work, and educate their local community. These are great shows to go to for rock specimens, unique jewelry components, tools, and of course, a general good time. To get the most out of your rock and gem show visit, here are some tips to keep in mind: To locate a show nearby, look in your local paper for rock show advertisements. If you know any local rock club members, they will also be aware of rock shows within driving distance. Rock shows can range from small to huge, so wear comfortable shoes just in case. Fanny packs and back packs are very handy in order to keep your hands free. Many shows have entry fees. Save that ticket stub for any raffles and also for tax purposes. Often lapidary artists and jewelry makers also teach. If you see a particular technique you're interested in, ask them if they teach any where near you. Rocks are heavy! So, prepare yourself by either bringing a small luggage cart or a strong friend. This is a good time to network, so bring business cards and also pick some up as you move through the show. If you're making a purchase, you might be tempted on haggle with the vendor. However, keep things in perspective. If you're making a small purchase at a small show, your vendor may be less able to make a deal with you. If you have a business, make sure you have a copy of your tax id number in case you need to show it to a vendor. Most of the vendors know each other, so if you're looking for something in particular, ask. They might be able to tell you which booth to go to. If the deal is too good to be true, it probably is. Remember for the most part you are dealing with people that do this for a living, they are not in business to give you a great deal. If the material in question is way under the going rate, especially if it is a commercially viable stone (Tourmaline, Sapphire, Tanzanite, etc) There is almost for sure a problem. Buyer beware. If you're wondering whether you should ask your friends to get together with you so you can get a better price, you must know this. This sounds like a good idea in theory, but in practice it tends to not work. There are several reasons for this. If you buy, say a kilo, to get a better price, tt will be mixed in sizes and quality, sorting it out is usually a problem (assuming there is someone with the skill and time to do it). Naturally, everybody wants the best ones and not everyone is going to get the one they want. What do you do with the material in the parcel that nobody wants (small, flawed, etc), especially to pay for? Not everybody will pick the same kind of rough for various reasons. How do you make everyone happy? If you want top rough, buying in quantity is not really the way to do it, at least in a group. Buying hand select parcels would be a better option. Buying in parcels is generally the right way to buy good rough and get a decent price. You will not get good top rough cheap. Remember that if you are buying parcels the dealer is giving you a break on the price. But you could and probably will be getting into expensive territory fast, most dealers want to sell a decent quantity in a parcel to make it worth their while. Be prepared to have to spend a reasonable amount of money. "Parcel" does not usually mean hand picked by you. They are two different things and prices. It depends on the dealer, some prefer their rough hand selected, which means it is good rough. They sell it in parcels, but they are parcels they themselves have selected. If you want to cherry pick (all of the large rounds for example), well that is a different price and I think most dealers are going to tell you the same thing. To most dealers a parcel is exactly that, a group of rough in mixed sizes and shapes. There is a lot of man-made and synthetic around, and a lot of it is being sold as real. You can and will get burned if you are not careful. Amethyst, Citrine, Ametrine, are very common. Emerald, Ruby, Sapphire, and Tanzanite are also starting to be seen pretty often. Be aware that there are man-made materials being sold as natural rough and check carefully. If you are not sure, or the dealer seems a little off, then do not buy it. Ask. A lot of dealers (jewelers too) are going with the "Don't ask, Don't tell" theory on man-made stones. Remember not all of them will tell the truth or sometimes even know if the stones are natural. They may have bought them from someone else and assumed it was real. The funny thing about the "Don't ask, don't tell." way of doing business is that a lot of dealers get caught also. Always ask. Even if you think it is a dumb question, ask anyway. Questions are free. If you want to buy a Native Cut Stone, and use it as preform, be cautious. Remember that there is a huge amount of man-made material being sold as real, especially cut (it is a lot harder to tell when cut). Quartz is not a good idea, neither is any type of Sapphire. It is just too easy to get taken. Tourmaline is a possible, there are no good fakes yet. Garnets are also possible, but usually anything good is expensive. Unless you are very good at judging shapes and yields. I would say proceed with caution. If you are not careful, the yields will come out a lot lower than you think. The main reason for this is that you will have to cut off a lot of rough to get the proper pavilion angle, on a bellied cut. It ruins your yield. A lot of times you really would be better off paying more for what you want in a piece of rough material that seems more expensive, but is actually not when you figure it all out. Look at all rough in different lighting conditions before you buy it. Get it out from under the show case lights (where it is at it's best) and look at it in normal mixed conditions. Also check under incandescent and florescent, this applies to Sapphires and Spinels in particular. These materials tend to have pretty dramatic color shifts depending on the light. They often look nice one way and bad another, in mixed light the stone should look good to you, color wise. If the color is dark or ugly in mixed light you probably do not want the rough. If the rough looks oiled or treated, walk away. Period. The only real reason for oiling rough is to hide flaws, they will tell you it is to help keep the dust down or some other excuse. The dealer is already lying to you. Do you want to do business with them? Watch carefully, look and see what the dealer has cut in his cases. The vast majority of dealers have cut stones for sale, both foreign and American. It is very common practice for them to go through their rough and cut the best stones (I call them cherries, as in cherry picking). Usually the rough that they have out is the leftovers from this process. Often a piece of rough that may look pretty good to you, has a hidden problem. That is why it is still rough and not cut in the case for sale for a lot more money. Be very careful and check the rough thoroughly. This does not mean that you cannot find something that you want to cut. But it does mean that the odds are not on your side. Know the prices. Watch for "Show Fever". Do not get show fever. Do some research. Know the going rates on the material you are looking for. Just because it is at the show does not mean it is a good deal. There are some handy things that I think most people will find that they will need and use at the show. Waist or Fanny Pack - To carry your loot. You can put a couple of energy bars in it, anti-acid (in case you buy show food), a couple of rubber bands, a few handy-wipes, extra batteries. Water Bottle - One that slides on the belt of the Fanny Pack is nice to have. Freezing the water in it the night before is a good idea. A bottle holder that will fit a standard soda bottle is nice. Most Bike shops have a lot of different styles. Pad of Paper and a Pen - sounds obvious, but I can never find one when I want one, and you will find yourself wanting to take notes. Calculator - If you are mathematically challenged, it is handy to be able to check the dealers' math, most people are honest, but they can make mistakes. A small pocket solar calculator that has a battery backup will help you. A Good Pair of Boots - Hiking boots with a good non-slip sole are ideal, there are a lot of things to trip over at the show, like rugs, stairs that do not match. Show Guide - Very handy because it has maps, dates, and dealer locations if you are looking for some one or place in particular. You can get one it the lobby of almost any hotel in town during the Gem Show They are free. Also, a show guide is pretty handy to have around during the rest of the year to look people up in. Keep one on reference shelf for easy use during the year. A good quality 10x Loupe (10x Loupes). A quality 10x loupe is a must when looking at and buying faceting rough at any Gem Show. You might prefer a smaller one to carry when you are at a Gem Show since it obviously is easier to fit into a pocket. There's quite a few people that carry one on a string around their neck during the show. It will help keeping you from losing one, although many carry theirs too in pocket or fanny pack. Always loupe a piece of rough. It may look good to your naked eye, but always check. Brass Calipers (Calipers). A good pair of inexpensive brass calipers is very handy when trying to decide on a piece of facetimg rough. You can get a good idea of what size the piece of rough is, and also what it will finish out to, in a cut gemstone. Also, you can use them a lot to estimate the amount of loss on a piece of rough if it has some flaws. Flash Light. A good flash light is also a must for looking at faceting rough. The MAGLITE flashlights might be a good choice. Carry a AA (2 cell) that has a belt pouch; it is very handy. Use rechargeable batteries since they are more cost-effective, but if you are traveling sometimes the charger can be a hassle. Pick a smaller one that takes AAA (2 cell) batteries that fits in your shirt pocket. Walmart carries them pretty cheap. Bulbs. Be sure and bring some extra bulbs (there is one extra in the end of the MAGLITE flashlights). Zip Lock Bags. Always try to carry a few different sizes of zip lock bag's with me. The type that have a white place on them for writing down information is good. You would be surprised at how many dealers do not have anything to put rough in, after you have bought it. Having bags and being able to write information on them (like how much, where you bought it, etc) is very handy and can often save you a headache later. Refractol. A jar of Refractol is a good idea, especially if you are a beginner. It can be kind of a hassle to carry around (along with tweezers and paper towels for cleaning up), but well worth having on hand if you are not sure how clean the piece of rough you are looking at is. Always ask before using refractol and always clean up well when you are done. If you are more experienced (or as you gain experience) you will not need it. Gram Scale (Scales). Use a scale that is accurate to .1g and will weight up to 100 grams at a time. It may sound like a lot to weigh, but if it is Quartz or something like that it is not a lot. Also the .1 (1/2 carat) accuracy is good enough for most things and will at least give you an idea of how accurate the dealers scale is, if you are in doubt. Also, believe it or not you will encounter dealers that do not even have a scale with them.