Brazil has a wealth of natural resources, and is also a world economic power of the future. If you like soccer, you'll be especially pleased to know that its young people have already won the Football World Cup a record five times too. Many people are unaware that Brazil is also the world's fifth largest country, and that's both in terms of area and population too.



There are twenty-seven States in Brazil, plus the Federal District which hosts the capital city, Brasilia. The Amazonas state has the greatest area ( being similar in size to Mongolia) while the Federal District is the smallest and about the size of Brunei.



The vast area is also geographically diverse. In fact, the topography of Brazil ranges from the flat Amazonian Basin (stretching from north to west) to the Brazilian Highlands in the south east that rises to around 1,283 feet. The highest point in Brazil is actually Pico de Neblina Mountain at 3,014 meters though. The Brazilian climate varies between humid tropical and subtropical. In the North Eastern drought zone, the climate is far drier with only between 375mm and 750 mm of annual rainfall (against the average national precipitation of 1,000mm to 1,800 mm for the rest of the country).




Brazil is also a popular tourist destination, and boasts some of the finest beaches in all the world. Every year, there is a huge rush for Brazilian visas, especially from people in western countries. These visas are available at all the consulates worldwide. When this happens, the demand for airline tickets (and their prices also) goes up, although most Brazilian airlines do provide extra flights to meet this demand during seasons.



Brazil occupies a huge area along the eastern coast of South America and embraces much of the continent's interior region too. It has common land borders with Uruguay to the south, Argentina and Paraguay to the southwest; Bolivia and Peru to the west; Colombia to the northwest - and Venezuela, Suriname, Guyana and the overseas department of French Guiana to the north too.


The nation's topography is likewise widely diverse. It includes hills, mountains, plains, highlands, and scrub land. Much of Brazil lies between 660 feet and 2,600 feet above sea level. The main upland area occupies almost all of the southern land mass.


The central western region is mountainous representing almost twenty per cent of the the total land mass. The move of the country's federal capital from Rio de Janeiro to Brasilia enabled road construction and railways to the interior making access easier, and contributing significantly to its development.

The northwest area of the plateau comprises broad, rolling terrain broken by a series of low, rounded hills.The southeastern section is more rugged, with a complex mass of ridges and mountain ranges reaching elevations of up to 3,900 feet. Towards the north, the Guiana Highlands separates the rivers that flow south into the Amazon Basin from those that empty into Venezuela to the north. In fact, Brazil has a dense and complex system of rivers. Major ones include the Amazon - the largest river in terms of volume and the second-longest in the world - and the Paran and its major tributary, the Igua u River famous for the Igua u Falls .


Climate The climate of Brazil comprises a wide range of weather conditions according to its varied topography - although the largest part of the country is tropical. In all, there are five major climatic subtypes, namely equatorial, tropical, semiarid, highland tropical, and temperate. Plant life varies from equatorial rainforests in the north and semi-arid deserts in the northeast, to temperate coniferous forests in the south and tropical savannas in central area.
The equatorial climate that predominates means that there is no real dry season generally, although there are some periods when more rain falls. Temperatures average 25 Celsius, and temperature variations are more marked between night and day, than between the different seasons. Across central Brazil, the rainfall tends to be more seasonal though as is characteristic of a savanna climate.
In the interior northeastern zone, the seasonal rainfall is even more extreme. Less rain falls in the semi-arid area that receives less than 31 inches of rain in an entire year - most of which falls in a period of three to five months creating long periods of drought between.
South of Bahia, near Sao Paulo, the rainfall pattern changes once again. Now, some appreciable rainfall occurs in all twelve months. The climate is temperate, with cooler temperatures and quite cool winters. In fact, frosts are quite common, with occasional snowfalls in the higher areas.

Wildlife As to be expected, the different ecosystems sustain some of the world's greatest biodiversity of creatures. However much remains still largely unexplored. It's estimated that the total number of plant and animal species in Brazil could approach four million. Larger mammals include pumas , jaguars, ocelots, rare bush dogs , and foxes. Peccaries, tapirs, anteaters, sloths, opossums, and armadillos are abundant. Deer are plentiful in the south too, as are monkeys of many species that abound in the rain forests to the north.
This natural heritage is under threat from cattle ranching and agriculture generally, as well as logging, mining,human resettlement, oil and gas extraction, over-fishing, trade in wildlife, infrastructural development, and invasive plant species.

Early colonial history
In 1494 Portugal and Spain arrogantly divided the New World between them, for they thought this was what God wanted them to do. In 1500, Pedro lvares Cabral landed in what is now called Brazil, and claimed it in the name of King Manuel First of Portugal. The Portuguese invaders soon began chopping down Brazilwood trees in the rainforests, on account of their valuable wood, and for the red dye they extracted from it.

After that, the Portuguese concentrated their efforts on what seemed to them to be more lucrative parts of Africa and India. Indeed, between 1500 and 1530 relatively few Portuguese expeditions even visited Brazil to chart the coast. In this early stage of the colonization of Brazil (and also later on) the Portuguese frequently relied more European adventurers - who lived together with the native peoples, and knew their languages and culture well. As time passed, the Portuguese colonialists realized that some European countries - especially France - were also sending excursions in search of Brazilwood. Worried about this, the Portuguese dispatched large missions to take formally possession of the land and drive away the French. In 1530, an expedition arrived to patrol the entire coast, to expel the French, and to create the first colonial villages on the coast.

Colonization
Colonial Brazil was first established by the Portuguese as 15 private, hereditary captaincies. One, named Pernambuco succeeded in growing sugar cane, while another, Sao Vicente prospered by dealing in indigenous slaves. The other thirteen captaincies failed. This convinced the King to make colonization a royal effort, rather than a private matter. In 1549, one Tom de Sousa sailed for Brazil to set up the central government. He brought with him Jesuit Priests - who set up missions, saved many indigenous natives from slavery, studied their languages, and converted many to Roman Catholicism too.


De Sousa's first act was the foundation of the capital city of Salvador da Bahia , in what is today the Brazilian State of Bahia. It was built on a slope overlooking the bay of Todos-os-Santos Bay, and was divided into an upper administrative area, and a lower commercial area with harbor port. In 1551, the colony was turned into a diocese instead with its seat in Salvador. Thereafter followed a period of fierce conflict with the native peoples, who even killed and ate the first bishop after he was shipwrecked.
The third governor general finally overcame all resistance in around 1562. After that, a long period of peace ensued.


Jesuit Missions The Jesuits built their first missions in Salvador and in Sao Paulo dos Campos de Piratininga, that was to become the city of Sao Paulo later.The success of the Jesuits in converting the indigenous peoples to Catholicism is linked to their capacity to understand the native culture, specially their language. They often gathered them into communities where they worked for the greater good and were evangelized. During this time, the Jesuits continued to battle the spread of slavery and saved many people from it.


The Sugarcane Era (1530-1700)

After early attempts to find gold and silver failed, the colonists shifted to an economy that was based on agricultural exports to Europe. These included tobacco, cotton, and cachaça (a liquor made from fermented sugarcane juice ) although sugarcane was to become by far the most important Brazilian colonial product through to the early 18th century. It was grown on large patches of cleared land, harvested and then milled and the sugar refined. Over time, the term engenho was applied to the entire sugarcane farm.
Initially, local native slaves did the physical work. However, perhaps on account of their rebellious nature, the Portuguese soon began importing black African slaves instead. Trade with the rest of the world was restricted too, the idea being that Brazil was to do commerce only with the mother country and its other colonial acquisitions.

Even though Brazilian sugar was reputed to be of high quality, the industry faced a crisis during the 17th and 18th centuries when the Dutch and the French started to produce sugar in the Antilles, located much closer to Europe, causing sugar prices to fall and a degree of recession.



Birth of the Quilombos The early sugarcane plantations - in northeastern Brazil especially - relied heavily on slave labor mainly from African. As early as the 17th Century these slaves began organizing themselves into settlements in the Brazilian hinterland. Their settlements, called quilombos , attracted not only African slaves but also people of indigenous origins too. Many of these were destroyed by the colonial masters who resented the tastes of freedom they provided. Of the many quilombos that once existed in Brazil though, a few do survive to this day as isolated rural communities.

The Search for Gold Begins in Earnest
At the end of the 17th Century, privately-sponsored bandeirantes expeditions discovered gold in the region of Minas Gerais in Central Brazil. Thus began a gold rush that was to lead to dramatic urban development during the 18th Century. Another consequence of these inland expeditions was the westward expansion of the frontiers of Colonial Brazil, far beyond the limits established by the Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494. At the close of the 17th century, freelance prospectors known as bandeirantes found gold in the interior of Brazil. A gold rush quickly followed as gold mining became the main economic activity of Colonial Brazil for the next century. In Portugal, the gold was used to pay for imports of industrialized goods imported from England, and also for magnificent Baroque monuments like the Convent of Mafra .
Gold reserves began to run out towards the end of the 18th Century, heralding a period of relative stagnation across the Brazilian hinterland again.

Settler Rebellion
During the period 1788 to 1789, conspirators belonging to the white upper class rebelled against the obligatory payment of all debts to a colonial government short on income from gold production. They wanted to create a Republic, in which their leader could be chosen through democratic elections. However the structure of the society - including the right to property and the ownership of slaves - would be unchanged. The conspiracy was discovered by the Portuguese Colonial Government in time to stop it. Eleven of the conspirators were banished to Angola. Harsher treatment was reserved for their leader Joaquim Jos da Silva Xavier (nicknamed Tiradentes) though. He was sentenced to death by hanging. Afterwards his body was cut into four pieces, and then sent to different towns as an example of retribution.




Declaration of the Republic of Brazil


A republican military coup led by General Deodoro da Fonseca deposed the Governor on 15 November 1889. The country's name became the Republic of the United States of Brazil, and the General the nation's first President. From 1889 to 1930, the dominant states of Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais alternated control of the Presidency. Then a military junta took control at the end of that period. The military took office in Brazil again by force in 1964 and remained in power through to March 1985, when it fell from grace. During this period, the name of the country's name was changed again, this time to the Federative Republic of Brazil. Democracy was re-established only in 1988 when the current Constitution came into force.


System of Government
The Brazilian Federation unifies three autonomous political entities. These are States, Municipalities, and the Federal District. There is no hierarchy between these - instead, the Federation relies on six fundamental principles, namely sovereignty, citizenship, dignity of the people, social value of labor , freedom of enterprise, and political pluralism . These are underpinned by a classic tripartite of executive, legislative, and judicial authorities, all under the Constitution.

Basis of Brazilian Law

Brazilian law is based on Roman-Germanic traditions, although the legal system itself is based on the Federal Constitution, and all other legislative and court decisions must conform to its rules. Thus, civil law concepts prevail over common law practice. Most of Brazilian law is codified, model, playing a complementary role. While court decisions may set out interpretive guidelines, these are not binding on other specific cases except in a few situations. Doctrinal theses and the works of academic jurists however have stronger influence in law creation and in law cases.
This codex is administered by judiciary entities, although in rare cases the Federal Senate may pass legal judgments too. In addition, there are also specialized military, labor, and electoral courts. The highest court of all is the Supreme Federal Tribunal . However this elaborate system has been criticized over the past few decades due to the slow pace at which final decisions are released. For example, lawsuits on appeal may take several years to resolve, and in some cases more than a decade elapses before definitive rulings are made.

Military Preparedness
Brazil is well-prepared to defend the freedom its people fought for so long for. It's armed forces comprise the Brazilian Army, the Brazilian Navy, and the Brazilian Air Force. The Military Police is better described as an ancillary force under control of each State Governor. Brazilian armed forces are the largest in all of Latin America. The Brazilian Air Force is also the largest air force on the continent with about 700 manned aircraft in regular service. The Brazilian Navy is responsible for sea operations, and for guarding Brazilian territorial waters against threats of all kinds. Interestingly, it is the oldest of the Brazilian armed forces and the only navy in Latin America to operate an aircraft carrier (taken over from the French Navy). The Brazilian Army is responsible for land-based military operations, and boasts a strength of approximately 190,000 fighting men and women.

Economy

Thanks to large and well developed agricultural, mining, manufacturing, and service sectors, Brazil's economy stands out against all other South American countries, and is expanding its presence into world markets too. In the early years of the current millennium real wages fell - and Brazil's economy only grew by just 2.2% per year as the country was buffeted by both domestic and international economic shocks. That Brazil absorbed these shocks at all without financial collapse is a tribute to the resiliency of the Brazilian economy and, of course the 2002 IMF loan paid back a scant three years later.

In fact, by 2004, Brazil was already enjoying far more robust growth - growth that yielded increases in employment and real wages too. The three pillars of its successful economic recovery are a floating exchange rate, an inflation-targeting regime, and tight fiscal policy, all reinforced by a series of IMF programs.

Of course, the Brazilian currency did depreciated alarmingly in 2001 and 2002, both of which contributed to a dramatic current account adjustment that included its first ever current account surplus since 1992. Productivity gains - especially agricultural also contributed to an export surge, and Brazil even surpassed the previous year's record export level in 2004, once again posting a surplus on its current account.

While economic management has been good since then, there remains some concern regarding economic vulnerabilities. The most significant of these are debt-related. The government's largely domestic debt increased steadily from 1994 through to 2003. This strained government finances until the 2004 recovery. However Brazil's foreign debt (a mix of private and public debt) is still large in relation to its small (but growing) export base.

Another challenge for future governments is maintaining economic growth so as to generate employment, and to make the government debt burden that much more manageable.



The investment grade aspects of Brazil's economy are diverse, encompassing as it does agriculture, industry, and a multitude of services. More lately, Brazil is finally punching with an even weight thanks to a booming economy and stronger global influence.These recent economic strengths have been partly due to a global boom in commodities prices, with exports from beef to soybeans especially soaring. During this time, agricultural and related sectors such as forestry, logging and fishing have accounted for more than five per cent of the gross domestic product. This is a performance that puts agri-business way ahead in terms of Brazil's trade balance , and that despite the trade barriers and subsidizing policies adopted by more fortunate highly-developed countries. During this period, industry - from automobiles, steel and petrochemicals to computers, aircraft, and consumer durables accounted for just over thirty per cent of total gross domestic product. This is however highly concentrated geographically, with the leading hubs being in metropolitan areas like Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Campinas, Porto Alegre, and Belo Horizonte. The same applies to high-tech businesses too
Brazil is the world's tenth largest energy consumer. This comes mainly from renewable sources , especially hydroelectricity and ethanol, but regrettably also from nonrenewable sources such as oil and natural gas.
All this is set to change. Previously a global power in agriculture and natural resources, Brazil is about to become an oil superpower, as it unleashes its greatest burst of prosperity - thanks to massive oil discoveries in recent times.


Sciences and Technology Brazilian science was born in the early years of the 19th Century, when the Portuguese Royal Family (headed by John VI) arrived in Rio de Janeiro in 1807. This was to escape from the Napoleon 's invasion of Portugal at that time. Until then, the country was still little more than a Portuguese colony - lacking universities, and a with a total lack of cultural and scientific organizations as well. This was in stark contrast to the former American colonies of the Spanish Empire, which, although being burdened by a largely illiterate population just like Brazil and Portugal, had managed to establish several universities dating back to the 16th Century.

These days, technological research in Brazil is largely in the remit of public universities and semi-private research institutes.Notwithstanding this, a worrisome seventy-three percent of research funding still comes from government funds. Some of Brazil's more notable technological hubs include the Butantan Institute, the Oswaldo Cruz Institute , the Aerospace Technical Center, INPE and the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation.
Brazil also has by far the most advanced space program in Latin America. It's capabilities include the ability to launch vehicles, maintain several launch sites, and operate terrestrial satellite facilities. In fact, on 14 October 1997 the Brazilian Space Agency even signed an agreement with NASA to provide parts for the International Space Station . On the nuclear front, uranium is enriched at the Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory to supply the nation's energy demands. Plans are also on the way to build the country's first nuclear submarine. Brazil is only one of 3 countries in Latin America with an operational synchrotron laboratory. This is a research facility where physics, chemistry, material science and life science mysteries are freely explored.
The Federal Constitution and the General Law of Education prescribe how the Federal Government, the various States, the Federal District, and the many Municipalities organize their respective education systems. Each of these administrative bodies is responsible for management of their funds, as well as their mechanisms to tap sources for this finance. As a guideline, the Constitution reserves 25% of state and municipal taxes (and 18% of federal taxes) for education purposes. Private schools complement the public school system.


In 2003, the literacy rate was 88% of the population, and the youth literacy rate 93.2%, forecasting general improvement over time. Illiteracy is at its highest in the northeast ( which has a high proportion of rural poor) at around 27%. Brazil's education continues to exhibit low levels of efficiency at 15-year-old levels, especially in the public school network. Higher education begins with undergraduate study, or sequential modules offering different specialized choices such as academic or vocational paths. Depending on choice and academic performance, students may also improve their educational background with Stricto Sensu or Lato Sensu postgraduate education programs.
A public health system is provided at all levels of government, while private healthcare fulfills a complementary role for those more fortunate.The main issues plaguing the Brazilian health system in 2006 were infant mortality, child mortality, maternal mortality, mortality by non-transmissible illness, and mortality caused by external causes including transport accidents, violence and suicide.

The official language of Brazil is Portuguese. This is spoken by almost everybody, and is virtually the only language used in media including newspapers, radio, television. It is also used for business and administrative purposes. The only exception to this is Nheengatu - an indigenous mother-tongue that was granted co-official status alongside Portuguese in the municipality of Sao Gabriel da Cachoeira. Portuguese is thus an important contributor to Brazil's national identity. It also gives it a cultural flavor distinct from its Spanish-speaking neighbors. Of course, Brazilian Portuguese has followed its own unique nuances under the influence of American Indian and African dialects .As a result, the language is somewhat different from that spoken in Portugal and other Portuguese-speaking countries, in particular on account of phonological and orthographic differences. For some years now, even Portugal has been considering reforming its own language. The hope is to someday accommodate linguistic developments in Brazilian Portuguese since the two languages gradually diverged after the original colonial settlement.
Minority languages are also spoken throughout this vast national territory that is almost the size of the United States. Some of these are spoken by indigenous peoples - in fact there are 180 Amerindian languages spoken in total. Others tongues are also used by immigrants and their descendants. Chief among these are communities of German speakers (mostly High German languages) and Italian (mainly the Talian dialect of Venetian origin). Both of these have developed Portuguese influences over time roo.

Brazilian Culture The wide variety of social elements has created a society characterized by ethnic complexity. In particular, Brazilian culture has been heavily influenced by European, African, and Indigenous cultures and traditions. The earliest major influence came from Portuguese culture itself, because of strong colonial ties to the Portuguese Empire . Among the inheritances the Portuguese introduced were their language, their Catholic religion and their colonial architectural style. Other influences on Brazilian culture were contributions by Italians, Germans and various other European immigrants . Historically their influences are felt closer to the South and Southeast of Brazil because that's where they settled first. The Amerindians influenced Brazil's language and cuisine too, as did Africans - brought to Brazil as slaves - especially in the cuisine, music, dance and religious sectors. Literature in the western sense dates back to the 16th Century, specifically to the writings of the first Portuguese explorers and navigators. Regional diversity in this regard reflects the country's mix of native and immigrant descendents. This has created a national cooking style that's similarly varied. Brazil's cultural tradition extends to musical styles that include the samba , bossa nova, forr , frevo, pagode and many others. The nation has also contributed to classical music, in the form of works of many talented composers. In arts, important modern artists include Anita Malfatti and Tarsila do Amaral - both early pioneers in Brazilian art. Cinema has a long tradition too. It reaches back to the late 19th century when the technology was being born, and gained a fresh level of international acclaim in recent years. This collage of cultures finds its expression in numerous festivals known as Carnaval s. These feature spectacular street parades and vibrant music, and have become one of the most powerful images of Brazil that tourists take home with them. They include an annual celebration held forty days before Easter to mark the beginning of the Lenten vigil. These festivals are celebrated throughout Brazil, although with distinct regional characteristics. The most dramatic of all take place in Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, Recife, and Olinda, although the nature of the individual events varies again. Other festive events include the Boi Bumb and Festa Junina June festivals.

Religion The constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the government generally respects this right in practice. As a result, a number of distinct religions exist side-by-side. The Roman Catholic Church is still dominant though, making Brazil the largest Catholic nation in the world in fact. Although the official link between the State and the Roman Catholic Church was discontinued in the late 19th Century, the Church continues to exert a major influence on national affairs to this day. Despite this, the number of Protestant Christians is steadily rising. Until 1970 most of these were members of "traditional churches" - mainly Lutherans , Presbyterians and Baptists. Since then though, numbers of Neo-Pentecostal and Pentecostal members have increased significantly. Traditional African beliefs - brought in by slaves - have blended with Catholicism to create Afro-Brazilian religions such as Macumba, Candombl, and Umbanda. In parallel, Amerindians continue practice a wide variety of indigenous religions that vary from group to group in different regions.
Approximately 72% of the population follow Roman Catholicism and 16% Protestantism Christianity. Other beliefs include other Christians, Kardecist Spiritualists , Traditional African and Amerindians Faiths, Buddhists, Jews, Islamics, Agnostics and Atheists.


Sport Brazil is a sporting nation, and this reflects in many things that the people do. Football is by far the most popular pastime. The Brazilian National Football Team is regularl y rated highly according to FIFA World Rankings. Other major national sports include basketball, volleyball, auto racing, and the martial arts. Although not as regularly practiced, tennis, handball, swimming, and gymnastics have also found a growing number of enthusiasts over past decades. In the martial arts, Brazilians have their own unique Capoeira,Vale Tudo, and Jiu-Jitsu. In auto racing terms Brazil's drivers have won the Formula 1 World Championship eight times, and count names like Emerson Fittipaldi, Nelson Piquet and Ayrton Senna among their heroes.
