Most legal systems distinguish different types of property and especially between land property and all other forms of property, such as goods and chattels, movable property or personal property. They often also distinguish tangible and intangible property.
One categorization scheme specifies three species of property: land, improvements such as immovable man-made things, and personal property such as movable man made things.
With the development of more complex forms of non-tangible property, personal property was further divided into tangible property such as cars, clothing, animals and intangible or abstract property such as financial instruments, stocks and bonds, and intellectual property like patents, copyrights, and trademarks.
Real estate or immovable property is a legal term that encompasses land along with anything permanently affixed to the land, such as buildings. Real estate i.e. immovable property is often considered synonymous with real property, also sometimes called realty, in contrast with personal property , also sometimes called chattel or personalty. However, for technical purposes, some people prefer to distinguish real estate, referring to the land and fixtures themselves, from real property, referring to ownership rights over real estate. The terms real estate and real property are used primarily in common law, while civil law jurisdictions refer instead to immovable property.


Personal property , also called chattels or personalty i n the common law systems or movable property or movables i n the civil law systems, is quite simply any property that can be moved from one location to another.
Personal property may be classified in a variety of ways.
Tangible personal property refers to any type of property that is not attached to real property or land which can be moved, touched or felt. These generally include items such as furniture, clothing, jewelry, art, writings, or household goods. In some cases, there can be formal title documents that show the ownership and transfer rights of that property after a person's death (for example, motor vehicles, boats, etc.) In many cases, however, tangible personal property will not be "titled" in an owner's name and is presumed to be whatever property he or she was in possession of at the time of his or her death.
Intangible personal property or "intangibles" refers to personal property that cannot be physically moved, touched or felt, but instead represents something of value such as negotiable instruments, securities, goods, and intangible assets.

The distinction between these types of property is significant for a variety of reasons. Usually one's rights on movables are more attenuated than one's rights on immovables (or real property). The statutes of limitations or prescriptive periods are usually shorter when dealing with personal or movable property. Real property rights are usually enforceable for a much longer period of time and in most jurisdictions real estate and immovables are registered in government-sanctioned land registers. In some jurisdictions, rights (such as a lien or other security interest) can be registered against personal or movable property.
Accountants also distinguish personal property from real property because personal property can be depreciated faster than improvements (while land is not depreciable at all). It is an owner's right to get tax benefits for chattel, and there are businesses that specialize in appraising personal property, or chattel.
In the common law it is possible to place a mortgage upon real property. Such mortgage requires payment or the owner of the mortgage can seek foreclosure. Personal property can often be secured with similar kind of device, variously called a chattel mortgage, trust receipt, or security interest. In the United States, Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code governs the creation and enforcement of security interests in most (but not all) types of personal property.
There is no similar institution to the mortgage in the civil law. However, a hypothec is a device to secure real rights against property. These real rights follow the property along with the ownership. In the common law a lien also remains on the property and it is not extinguished by alienation of the property; liens may be real or equitable.



Property taxes in Indiana are imposed at the local level on real property (land and buildings) and certain types of personal property. Business personal property consists of inventories, machinery and equipment, special tooling, and construction in progress. Individual personal property consists of a variety of items, such as, recreational vehicles, campers, trailer, non-motorized boats, ATV's, snowmobiles etc., which do not pay an excise tax.
The assessment date is March 1. Property taxes are based on a "rate per hundred" dollars of assessed value.Township and county officials determine the assessed value of real property and taxpayers are responsible for filing annual returns for personal property. The assessment level in Indiana is 100% of true value, which by statute does not mean market value. True tax value is determined through the application of the rules of the Department of Local Government Finance.
Major exemptions include air and water pollution control equipment; property used for educational, scientific, literary, or charitable purposes; inventory located within an enterprise zone; certain property stored in a warehouse pending shipment out of state; and imports and exports stored in a Foreign Trade Zone.
Keep in mind that some of these instances require the filing of specific forms to acquire the exemption.
For more information, contact: Department of Local Government Finance, Assessment Division 100 N Senate Ave., N1058 Indianapolis, IN 46204 317-232-3773 http://www.in.gov/dlgf


Kansas defines Personal Property through its key characteristic of the ability to move it without damage either to itself or to the real estate to which it is attached. Personal property becomes real property only if it is affixed in such a way that it loses its original physical character and cannot practically be restored to its original condition.
Personal property may be leased, loaned, rented, consigned, or owned. The basic categories include: furniture, fixtures, plant equipment, office equipment, machinery, boats, aircraft, mobile homes, and recreational vehicles.
telephone systems fax machines copy machines desks and chairs computers postage meters shelving and racks plant machinery storage tanks refrigeration units high loaders tools/dies/molds industrial equipment manufacturing equipment, materials and supplies satellite equipment minerals Examples of individual personal property boats non-highway vehicles sailboards heavy trucks trailers hot-air balloons mobilehomes off-road vehicles four-wheelers aircraft Automobiles and most recreational vehicles are classed and taxed at the time of registration for license plate or renewal decal. A personal property appraiser in the Johnson County Appraiser's Office can provide further clarification of what constitutes taxable personal property.
The valuation of owned or leased commercial personal property is based on the cost of assets. Assets are valued according to their cost when new, or their used acquisition cost, and the appropriate economic life. The asset is then depreciated over its economic life to a remaining salvage value.
Economic lives that are assigned to commercial assets come from guidelines issued by the State of Kansas, Internal Revenue Service (IRS) publications and the Marshall & Swift Valuation Services.
Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment purchased after June 30, 2006 is exempt. And si nce Jan. 1, 2007, any qualifying item of commercial personal property that originally cost $1,500 or less is also exempt.
Valuation of Individual Personal Property Many Personal Property assets belonging to individuals are valued from market data using appraisal guides and state and regional market sources. This market data is then used to establish the current value of a particular asset. Typically, this value will be based on current trade-in values according to the age of the asset and market condition.
Automobiles, light trucks and motorcycles are classed separately by the State of Kansas.
According to Kansas Statute, K.S.A. 79-303: "Every person, association, company or corporation who shall own or hold, subject to his or her control, any tangible personal property shall list said property for assessment."
K.S.A. 79-301: "All tangible personal property subject to taxation shall be listed and assessed as of the first day of January of each year in the name of the owner thereof."
As with most States that levy Tangible Personal Property Taxes, it is your responsibility to file this information with the County Appraiser's Office. If you own any tangible personal property with the intent to establish and/or operate a business (including home based business), or if you own any recreational property or vehicles not taxed at the time of registration, or mobile homes not on a permanent foundation, you must file a rendition with the County Appraiser's Office.
The rendition form is available through the Appraiser's Office. You may even file your commercial personal property rendition electronically, via an e-mail attachment. You may e-mail your personal property rendition as an attachment to: APR-PerPropEfile@jocogov.org. The preferred file format is Microsoft Excel. However, Adobe PDF, MS Word and TIF formats are also acceptable.
Attachments must include the following information: Name of Business Personal Property Account Number Mailing Address Situs Address as of January 1 of the assessment year Contact Name & Phone Number If you have questions, you may e-mail APR-PerPropEfile@jocogov.org or contact Margaret LaRue, Personal Property Supervisor at 913-715-0136.
How are taxes figured on personal property? If the fair market value of your individual personal property is $5,000 and the fixed percentage of assessment is 30%, this would mean the assessed value would be $1,500: ($5,000 x .30 = $1,500).
Once taxing groups (school districts, cities, county, etc.) set their mill levy, this amount is used to calculate your taxes.
Let's assume the combined mill levy (tax rate) has been set at 120 mills. Multiply the assessed value of your property ($1,500) by the mill levy (120 mills or .120). The answer is $180, which is your share of the costs of public services.
For example : $5,000 Market Value x .30 Assessment Ratio 1,500 Assessed Value (A.V.) x .120 Mill Levy (120 mills per $1,000 A.V.) $180 Tax Amount
Calendar The County Appraiser mails a Notice of Appraised Value to all personal property owners in Johnson County notifying them of the appraised value of their personal property as of January 1st.
The value notice identifies the property, the classification of the property (individual or commercial personal property), the appraised value, and the assessed value for the current and prior year, and instructions on how to appeal the appraisal.
These appraised values of personal property are determined from the accurate listings provided by the owner earlier in the year.
Relief from tax grievance if you have been assessed a penalty and wish to grieve it before the State Board of Tax Appeals, y ou will need a grievance form. These tax grievance forms, as well as tax exemption forms may be found on the Appraiser's Office's Web site.
Property owners may appeal the value on their property only once during any tax year.
Payment under protest Payment Under Protest forms are used to address valuation issues on personal property reported at the time the bill is issued and is to be paid. This form must accompany the payment of taxes to the County Treasurer's Office.
This form is available through the County Treasurer's Office where they will be happy to discuss this form and its completion with you.
Tax exemption forms Tax Exemption forms are used for individuals or businesses wishing to acquire exempt status on certain property according to Kansas Statutes, i.e., K.S.A. 79-201, et seq.
Office of the Appraiser 11811 S. Sunset Dr. Suite 2100 Olathe, KS 66061
Tel: 913-715-9000 Fax: 913-715-0010
Web address: appraiser.jocogov.org


All personal property is, by law, valued at 100 percent of its real market value unless exempt by statutes. Personal property is taxable in the county where it is located as of the assessment date, January 1 at 1 a.m.
Taxable personal property Taxable personal property includes machinery, equipment, furniture, etc., used previously or presently in a business (including any property not currently being used, placed in storage, or held for sale).
Examples of taxable personal property include: Amusement devices/equipment. Non-inventory supplies. Barber and beauty furniture/equipment. Garage and service station tools/equipment. Leased equipment. Medical equipment. Movable machinery, tools, and equipment (such as logging and construction equipment, lift trucks, and equipment used in service industries). Office furniture/equipment. Store furniture/equipment. Libraries such as repair manuals, electronic media, compact discs, videos, tapes, sample books, law books. Fixed load/mobile equipment. Floating property. Tax-exempt personal property The following items are exempt from property tax: Intangible personal property. Money at interest, bonds, notes, shares of stock, business records, computer software, surveys and designs, and the materials on which the data are recorded (paper, tape, film, etc.) (ORS 307.020). All items held exclusively for personal use. Household goods, furniture, clothing, tools, and equipment used exclusively for personal use in and around your home (ORS 307.190). Farm animals. Livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, and bees (ORS 307.394). Inventories. Items of tangible personal property which are or will be sold in the ordinary course of business (materials, containers, goods in process, and finished goods) (ORS 307.400). Farm machinery and equipment (ORS 307.394). Licensed vehicles other than fixed load/mobile equipment (ORS 801.285). Filing your personal property tax return Each individual, partnership, firm, or corporation that has taxable personal property must file a return by March 1.
Major industrial properties appraised by the Department of Revenue will report on an industrial property return furnished by the department.
For all other accounts appraised by the county assessor, a return form may be mailed to you by the county assessor prior to January 1 if you were assessed the previous year. You must report property you own or had in your possession as of January 1 at 1 a.m. If you do not receive a form from the assessor, you are still obligated to obtain and file a personal property tax return. There is a penalty for late filing. If you need help completing the form, contact your county assessor's office.
If you sell your business, notify the county assessor to avoid future liability on the personal property.
Extension of filing deadline In certain cases, you may request an extension. You must submit your extension request in writing before March 1. Contact your county assessor for further information.
Penalty for late filing If you report taxable real property on an industrial property return to the county assessor and your return is filed late, a penalty of $1 for each $1,000 of assessed value will be charged, but such penalty shall not be less than $10 or more than $250.
If you report taxable personal property along with real property on an industrial property return to the Oregon Department of Revenue and your return is filed late, a penalty for late filing will be $10 for each $1,000 (or fraction) of total assessed value. This penalty shall not be less than $10 and not more than $5,000 (ORS 308.295).
If you report taxable personal property on a Confidential Personal Property Return, the penalty charge increases periodically. If your return is filed after March 1 but on or before June 1, a penalty of 5% of the tax will be charged. If the return is filed after June 1 but on or before August 1, the penalty increases to 25% of the tax. After August 1, the penalty increases to 50% of the tax.
Paying your tax Property tax statements are mailed to taxpayers in late October. You must pay at least one-third of your tax bill by November 15 to avoid interest charges. You receive a 3% discount if you pay the full amount due by November 15. If you pay two-thirds of the full amount by November 15, you receive a 2% discount. If you choose to pay in thirds, the second payment is due by February 15 and the third by May 15.
Personal property taxes become a lien on July 1 against any and all of the assessed property as well as on personal property assessed in the same category. The taxes may become a lien against all personal property owned or in the possession of the person in whose name the property is assessed. The taxes are a debt due and owing from the owner of the personal property.
Delinquent taxes Taxes on personal property become delinquent whenever any installment is not paid on or before the due date. The tax collector will send a notice of delinquency showing the total amount due, including interest when any tax payment is not made.
If no payment is received, the tax collector may: issue a warrant for the collection of the delinquent personal property taxes and serve it on you, seize and sell the assessed personal property or taxable personal property you own or control, or charge the tax against real property you own. 1. Warrants: When the taxes become delinquent and no payment is made in response to the delinquency notice, the tax collector must prepare, serve, and record a warrant. A copy is served on you either by certified mail, publication in a newspaper, or personal service. Immediately after the warrant is served, if the delinquent taxes, interest, penalties, and costs are not paid, the warrant is recorded with the county clerk. This has the effect of a judgment against you. The tax collector can garnishee your bank account or wages to satisfy that judgment.
2. Seizure and sale: The ta x collector can seize and sell the assessed property owned or controlled by the person assessed. When the tax collector takes possession of the property, the owner or person having the property, and all security lien holders, are notified. The seized property is advertised for sale and the notice of time and place of the sale is posted in three public places in the county at least 10 days before the sale. If you do not pay before the time set for the sale, the tax collector will sell the property at public auction.
The property will be sold to the highest bidder, as long as the bid is at least equal to the total of taxes, interest, penalties, and costs. If the highest bid is less than that, the title to the property passes to the county. Then the county may sell the items at a private sale for a price the county sets as reasonable. If more than one item has been seized, only enough items will be sold to recover the taxes, interest, and penalties.
The money received from the sale is applied to your debt. Any unpaid tax remains a debt. You get any surplus over the amount of taxes, interest, and penalties.
3. Lien on real property: Recording a warrant causes a lien upon your real property. The tax collector may charge the delinquent personal property tax against a specific property you own. After three years' delinquency, the county can foreclose for delinquent taxes on real property.
Appeals If you feel the county assessor has estimated the value of your property incorrectly, you have the right to appeal. But your appeal must be based on the property's value, not on the amount of taxes owed. To receive a change in your assessment, you must convince your county board of property tax appeals that your property is incorrectly valued. You must support your belief with evidence such as appraisal reports and comparable sales. You also have the right to appeal if you believe you were charged a late filing penalty in error.


Utah defines taxable Tangible Personal Property as equipment, machinery, furniture or other tangible personal property that is functioning at its highest and best use for the purpose it was designed and constructed and is generally capable of performing that function without being combined with other items of personal property. An item of taxable tangible personal property is not an individual component part of a piece of machinery or equipment but the item of machinery or equipment as a whole. For example, a fully functioning computer is an item of taxable tangible personal property but the motherboard, hard drive, tower or sound card are not
Generally, personal property used in business is subject to property taxes. Utah law requires business personal property to be reported to the county assessor where the property is located (has situs) on a tax form identified as a Personal Property Signed Statement. Registered motor vehicles and recreational vehicles are subject to Uniform Fees.
Personal Property is taxed based on its taxable value as of January 1st of each year. In order to value personal property, the Utah State Tax Commission provides personal property classification schedules which are used by all county assessors in Utah.
Determining Taxable Value Taxable value for business personal property classes subject to an ad valorem tax is calculated by applying the acquisition cost at the retail level of trade by the percent good factor of the year acquired.
Cost of Acquisition must include all costs required to put an item into service. In addition to the cost of the item, include the following costs: Freight in, includes shipping costs, loading at origin, unloading at destination, crating, skidding, and other applicable costs of shipping. Installation, engineering, rigging, erection or assembly to include foundations, pilings, utility connections and any other costs related to installation. Excise and sales taxes. Any other costs related to putting personal property into service are to be included in acquisition cost. Indirect costs such as debugging, licensing fees, permits, insurance or security are not included in acquisition cost. Filing a Personal Property Tax Statement to the County Assessor: County Assessors are required to provide personal property taxpayers with a tax form to file a statement of assessable personal property on an annual basis. You are required to file a tax statement on or before May 15th for each assessment year except first class counties that require a tax statement within 60 days of the Assessor's request.
There are penalties for failing to file a signed statement.
Other Taxable Personal Property Registered Motor Vehicles and recreational vehicles taxed with two types of state wide uniform fees. Passenger vehicles, light duty trucks, off-highway recreational vehicles, street motorcycles, travel trailers, truck campers, personal watercraft, vessels under 31 feet in length and non-commercial trailers are subject to uniform fees based on vehicle age categories. These fees are paid when vehicles are registered or with registration renewal. Heavy duty trucks, commercial trailers and vessels 31 feet in length and longer are subject to a value based state wide uniform fee of 1.5% of taxable value. Motor homes are subject to a unifrom fee of 1% of taxable value. The vehicle value is calculated by applying the percent good from the property class published in the Recommended Personal Property Schedules to the vehicle's "cost new". These fee are paid at registration renewal.
Aircraft is subject to a $25 Uniform Fee. The Aircraft registration fee is .4% (.004) of the "Average Wholesale Value" as listed in the Fall edition of the Aircraft Bluebook Price Digest. These fees are established by statute. These fees are paid to the Tax Commission when the aircraft is registered or at registration renewal. Supplies on hand as of January 1st are to be valued and assessed at total cost including freight-in. Supplies on hand include: all office supplies, shipping supplies, maintenance supplies, replacement parts, lubricating substances, fuel, and consumable items not held for sale in the ordinary course of business. Property held for lease or rent or actually leased or rented from inventory on January 1st is subject to ad valorem tax paid to the county assessor. Refer to the appropriate recommended class schedule to determine taxable value. Entities engaged in a combination of direct sales, leases, rental or rent-to-own may exempt only inventory held for sale. Transitory personal property inc ludes property that is not in Utah on January 1st but is subject to a proportional assessment paid to the county assessor when it has been in the state for 90 consecutive days in a calendar year. Such property is subject to transitory personal property tax for the period it remains in Utah. (See Tax Commission Administrative Rule R884-24P-65). Personal Property Exempt From Property Tax Wares and merchandise , h eld for sale in the ordinary course of business, which constitute the stock-in-trade of any retailer, wholesaler, manufacturer, farmer, or livestock owner, are exempted from ad valorem taxes (UCA Section 59-2-1114) Farm Machinery and Equipment , including t ractors, milking equipment, feed handling equipment, harvesters, storage and cooling facilities, choppers, grain drills and planters, tillage tools, scales, combines, seeders, sprayers, haying equipment and other machinery or equipment used primarily for agricultural purposes are exe mpt from ad valorem property tax. (UCA Section 59-2-1101). However, the exemption does not include motor vehicles required to be registered with the Tax Commission, as well as machinery and equipment used in processing of agricultural products. Livestock is exempt from ad valorem property taxation. (UCA Section 59-2-1113) Property used for irrigation purposes is exempt from property taxation. (UCA Section 59-2-1111) The exemption is limited to the property listed in Article XIII, Section 2 of the Utah Constitution. Household Furnishings, furniture, and equipment used exclusively to maintain a primary or secondary residence are exempt form property taxation (UCA Section 59-2-1113 and Administrative Rule 884-24P-44). Personal Property Exempt per Utah Code Ann. Section 59-2-1115 Tangible personal property of a taxpapyer is exempt if the property has a total aggregate fair market value of $3,800 or less in 2009. The exemption does not apply to registered motor and recreational vehicles or mobile homes. To apply for this exemption, contact the County Assessor in the county the property is located.
An item of taxable tangible personal property is exempt from taxation if the acquisition cost of that item was $1,000 or less and is valued at a percent good of 15% or less in 2009. The exemption only applices to personal property valued by scheedules having a percent goo residual of 15% or less.
Registered Motor Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles and Aircraft Registered motor vehicles, recreational vehicles and aircraft are exempt from ad valorem taxation and are taxed by uniform fees.


Localities in Virginia may levy a tax on the tangible personal property of businesses and individuals.
Included in tangible personal property are motor vehicles ("car tax"), business furniture and fixtures, computer equipment, farming equipment, boats, recreational vehicles, campers and trailers.
Car tax Localities may elect to prorate the taxes on motor vehicles, and trailers which have acquired situs within a locality after the tax day for the balance of the year. Generally, the situs of a vehicle is the locality in which the vehicle is normally garaged or parked. However, there are some instances where the general rule may not apply, such as full-time college or graduate students
If a district prorates the personal property taxes on vehicles and trailers, it may do so on a monthly basis for the portion of the year the vehicle is situated in, or has a situs in the district. For example, if you own a vehicle on the tax date, January 1, but sell it or move out of the district on March 4, you might be taxed on that vehicle for the months of January and February only. However, if you were to sell the vehicle or move on March 16, you might be taxed for January, February and March. Likewise, if you purchase a vehicle after January 1, you would be taxed only for the time period within the calendar year that you own the vehicle and it is situated in the district.
"Tax Relief" Definition: The Personal Property Tax Relief Act ("PPTRA") provides for the relief from a portion of the tangible personal property tax imposed on the first $20,000 of value on passenger cars, trucks and motorcycles used for personal use. Vehicles with a gross weight of more than 7,500 lbs. or for which more than 50% of the use is for business purposes are not eligible for this tax relief program. You are required to pay the full amount of the vehicle license fee stated on your property tax bill.
Qualifying for car tax relief Tangible personal property taxes for personal use vehicles may qualify for tax relief as provided in the Personal Property Tax Relief Act.
Vehicles valued at $1,000 or less may receive 100% tax relief. Tax relief for vehicles valued between $1,001 and $20,000 is based on the district's share of funds allocated in the State Budget and the total value of vehicles eligible for tax relief.
To qualify for tax relief, the vehicle must be: Owned or leased by an individual under a contract that requires the payment of property taxes by the lessee of the vehicle, and Used less than 50% for business purposes. Virginia law now requires that vehicle owners certify the use of their vehicle as either personal or business to receive the benefits of the PPTRA. If you can answer yes to any of the following questions, your motor vehicle is considered by STATE LAW to have a business use and does not qualify for Car Tax Relief.
Is more than 50% of the mileage for the year used as a business expense for Federal Income Tax purposes or reimbursed by an employer? Is more than 50% of the depreciation associated with the vehicle deducted as a business expense for Federal Income Tax purposes? Is the cost of the vehicle expensed pursuant to Section 179 of the Internal Revenue Service Code? Is the vehicle leased by an individual and the leasing company pays the tax without reimbursement from the individual? Certification will be obtained when you register your vehicle and or when you pay your personal property taxes.
Important note: Vehicles used primarily for business purposes and vehicles weighing in excess of 7,500 lbs. continue to be assessed by the local tax officials and are not subject to any of the provisions of the PPTRA.
Business Personal Property Business personal property is self-reported annually by each business. A depreciation schedule is applied to the original cost of the property to arrive at fair market value. Different depreciation schedules are used for programmable computer equipment and other business tangible personal property.


The business tangible personal property tax is a local tax on all furniture, fixtures, machinery, and tools used by businesses. The property is assessed on a sliding percentage scale of its original capitalized cost, depending on its age. In general, for taxable goods other than programmable computer equipment discussed below, the schedule starts at 80% of the original capitalized costs and declines by 10% a year to 20% of original cost.
Accelerated Depreciation Schedule for Computers Programmable computer equipment and peripherals are assessed on an accelerated depreciation schedule: 65% in the first year 45% in the second year 30% in the third year 10% in the fourth and subsequent years
Business Categories Eligible for Exemptions and Limitations Manufacturers: Furniture, fixtures, machinery, and tools used by a manufacturing business, but not in actual manufacturing, are exempt, but property used in other lines of business is taxable; e.g. retail, sales, etc. Public Service Companies: Companies that are regulated by the Virginia State Corporation Commission (SCC) pay local personal property tax at the lower real estate tax rate rather than the personal property tax rate. Nonprofits: Certain nonprofits, including religious bodies, cementeries, colleges and institutions of learning, and other similar organizations that have received both Arlington County Board and Virginia General Assembly approval may be exempt in whole or in part from local real and personal property taxation. Intangible Property Stocks, bonds, inventory and application computer software are considered intangible property on which there is no state or local tax.


2 step process: Step 1 - On the form provided by the Finance Department, submit a listing of property subject to 2009 business tangible personal property taxes no later than March 1, 2009.
Step 2 - Submit your tax payment on the bill provided by Finance on or before May 1, 2009. Should you fail to receive either the form necessary for Step 1 or your tax bill for your payment for Step 2, please contact the Tax Assessment Office of the Department of Finance at 804-646-5700.
Appeals: Taxpayers/property owners can appeal assessments to the Director of Finance and/or to the Richmond Circuit Court.


In Washington, personal property includes machinery, equipment, furniture and supplies of businesses. In general, the characteristic that distinguishes personal property from real property is mobility. Household goods and certain intangibles are exempt from personal property tax, unless used in a business activity. Business inventories are specifically exempt from personal property tax. Unless specifically exempt, all tangible personal property is subject to the personal property tax. Personal property tax rates are the same as for real property.
Everyone who uses personal property in a business or has taxable personal property must complete a personal property affidavit by April 30 each year. The affidavit must list the taxable personal property located in the county as of 12:00 p.m. on January 1. The affidavit must include the acquisition cost and year acquired for all taxable property. The assessor uses the affidavit to value personal property for taxes due the following year.
County assessors and treasurers levy and collect the property tax. Every January, county assessors mail personal property affidavits to persons who have previously listed personal property. Businesses that do not receive an affidavit or that have questions regarding paying real and/or personal property taxes should contact their local county treasurer's office.


Ohio's century-and-a-half old local property tax on machinery, equipment and inventory used in business was eliminated in 2008.
The final tax payments for 2008 -- the last year of the tangible personal property tax for the vast majority of businesses in Ohio -- were due to county treasurers by Monday, Sept. 22.
The payment deadline marked a milestone in the elimination of the tax, and was a key element of tax reforms enacted in 2005 by the Ohio General Assembly and embraced by Governor Ted Strickland in his 2008-09 state budget plan.
For decades, analysts had criticized the tangible personal property tax as hurting Ohio's ability to attract business investment. In 2009, Ohio joined a select group of nine other states without a general business tax on tangible personal property.
The uniform taxation of personal property in Ohio can be traced back to 1846. Since 1931, state law has limited taxes on tangible personal property to machinery, inventory, furniture, fixtures and other equipment used in the course of conducting business.
The personal property tax is being phased out by gradually lowering the percentage of value at which personal property is assessed. The assessment rate was 6.25 percent for the 2008 tax year. In 2009, the rate drops to zero for all businesses except certain telephone companies -- which are being phased out according to a different schedule -- and certain classes of public utilities that will continue to pay the tax.
Payment schedules vary according to the taxpayer. For businesses with property in only one county, one-half of their tax liability was due to their county treasurer on April 30, with the balance to be paid by next Monday, Sept. 22, unless extended locally. For businesses with property in more than one county, the total tax liability is due by Monday, Sept. 22 to county treasurers.
The elimination of the personal property tax, which is Ohios largest local business tax, is expected to save business owners about $1.6 billion annually. The phase-out is part of a larger series of reforms that also include the gradual elimination of the corporation franchise tax and a 21 percent, across-the-board cut in state income tax rates. Overall net savings from the reforms when complete is estimated at $3.9 billion annually.
Revenue from the new commercial activity tax (CAT) is being used to compensate schools and local governments for lost personal property tax revenue. Also, the Ohio Department of Taxation will continue to conduct audits of personal property taxpayers and lead other oversight measures to ensure all businesses are meeting their personal property tax obligations.
