Equal Opportunity Employer
Have you ever been interested in a work, only to find out that you're not allowed to apply because you don't belong to the age they want, you are female, you belong to a certain race, etc.? Chances are you have been a victim of employment discrimination and you must learn things about Equal Opportunity Employment.


What is Equal Employment Opportunity?
Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) gives all people the right to be considered for any job for which they are skilled and qualified, ensuring that the best person for the job is employed. EEO is based on the principle of recruiting and promoting people on merit.
EEO also promotes a working environment free from harassment of any kind, and access for all staff to job-related opportunities, eg. training and development, promotion and reclassification.


EEO means that all employees have equal access to the opportunities that are available at work. The aim of EEO is to ensure all employees are treated with fairness and respect in that they are not subject to discrimination or harassment in the workplace.
EEO does not assume that everyone has the same abilities or that everyone will reach the same levels of seniority or remuneration. Rather, it requires that everyone be given an equal chance to use their skills and capabilities.
Equal opportunity in the workplace matters because it: helps attract and retain the best talent enhances an organisation's productivity and innovation improves workplace relationships helps to attract and retain a broader 'customer base' reduces an organisation's risk.


The Merit Principle
Merit is the basis of equal employment opportunity in Australia. The merit principle aims to ensure that the best person for the job is employed. It gives all people the right to be considered for a job on the basis of their abilities, qualifications, experience, and standard of work performance.
What are EEO groups?
Particular groups of people have traditionally been disadvantaged in employment, because of discriminatory laws, rules, employment practices, stereotypes and attitudes. NSW legislation defines these groups, sometimes referred to as 'EEO groups', as Indigenous Australians people who speak a first language other than English women people with a disability The University has a legal obligation to eliminate discrimination and harassment and to promote equality of opportunity for members of EEO groups.
What is Affirmative Action?
Members of EEO groups may not have had equal access to job opportunities or training and development for reasons such as past discrimination or prejudice, different educational experience, or being locked into low opportunity jobs. Affirmative Action (AA) strategies aim to redress these past disadvantages and improve employment outcomes for people from EEO groups. The principle of Affirmative Action acknowledges that equal treatment may not produce equal outcomes; differential treatment may be required to achieve real equity.
Examples of Affirmative Action at UTS include the Wingara Strategy to promote Indigenous employment; the inpUTS Educational Access Scheme and the Women@UTS Program.

No one should be denied to apply to a work just because he or she doesn't belong to the age bracket given by the company.


The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, as part of an ongoing effort to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of its operations, established the Federal Sector Workgroup, which was composed of representatives from offices throughout the Commission. The Workgroup focused on the effectiveness of the EEOC in enforcing the statutes that prohibit workplace discrimination in the federal government: section 717 of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination against applicants and employees based on race, color, religion, sex and national origin; section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of disability; section 15 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, which prohibits employment discrimination based on age; and the Equal Pay Act, which prohibits sex-based wage discrimination.


Armed with this knowledge about Equal Opportunity in Employment, you'll know now what rights you have when it comes to looking for a work.