Skeet shooting is one of the three major types of competitive shotgun shooting at targets . The event is in part meant to simulate the action of bird hunting. There are several types of Skeet, including one with Olympic status often called Olympic Skeet or International Skeet, and many with only national recognition. The National Sportsman and Hunting and Fishing magazines introduced the game in their February 1926 issue and a prize of 100 dollars was offered to anyone who could come up a name for the new sport. The winning entry was "skeet" derived from the Scandinavian word for "shoot" chosen by Gertrude Hurlbutt. During World War II, Skeet was used by the American military to teach gunners the principle of leading and timing on a flying target.


The shooter shoots from 7 positions on a semicircle with a radius of 21 yards (19 m), and an 8th position halfway between stations 1 and 7. There are two houses that hold devices known as "traps" that launch the targets, one at each corner of the semicircle. The traps launch the targets to a point 15 feet above ground and 18 feet outside of station 8. One trap launches targets from 10 feet above the ground ("high" house) and the other launches it from 3 feet above ground ("low" house).
At stations 1 and 2, the shooter shoots at single targets launched from the high house and then the low house, then shoots a double where the two targets are launched simultaneously.
At stations 3, 4, and 5 the shooter shoots at single targets launched from the high house and then the low house. At stations 6 and 7, the shooter shoots at single targets launched from the high house and then the low house, then shoots a double.
At station 8, the shooter shoots one high target and one low target. The shooter must re-shoot his first missed target, or if no targets are missed, must shoot his 25th shell at the low house station 8. This 25th shot was once referred to as the shooter's option as he was able to take it where he preferred. Now, to speed up rounds in competition, the shooter must shoot the low 8 twice for a perfect score.

Charles Davies, an avid grouse hunter, was the one who invented skeet in 1920 as a sport called Clock Shooting. The original course was a circle with a radius of 25 yards with its circumference marked off like the face of a clock and a trap set at the 12 oclock position. When a chicken farm started next door, the practice of shooting from all directions had to cease. The game evolved to its current setup by 1923 when one of the shooters William Harnden Foster solved the problem by placing a second trap at the 6 o'clock position and cutting the course in half. Foster quickly noticed the appeal of this kind of competition, so he set it out to make it a national shooting sport.



Shoot flying frisbies and earn points - the frisbies get faster as you go through the levels. Be warned that you'll have to reload every 2 shots.

Air XXL Electronic Skeet Shoot Game Air XXL Electronic Skeet Shoot Automatic Launching Power The Air XXL Electronic Skeet Shoot Game has an automatic disk launcher that holds up to eight discs. The discs are launched using a remote controlled launch switch which can be pressed with either your hand or foot. Using the air-powered dart gun, which has a rotating barrel with four darts , you can practice shooting the discs . The sharp-shooting air gun is easy to use and also has an extra barrel with four backup darts stocking you up with ammo always. Indoor or Outdoor The launcher makes a lot of noise and the sight of flying discs and darts may get on your parents' nerves, so this is best played for short period of time or with no adults around. Remember to only fire the gun at the targets, not at people although the foam darts probably won't hurt a person.

The game's automatic disc launcher has a fast and slow mode depending on where you're playing and how much space you have.

The fast mode fires the discs up to 25 feet (11 meters) and is best suited for the outdoors, or a very spacious room. The slow mode shoots the discs a few feet and is better for playing inside, where you might not have much space. The Air XXL Skeet Shooting Game is great for parties or whenever you have a bunch of friends over.


The Air XXL Electronic Skeet Shoot Game costs around $50 USand needs four C batteries, which are not included.
1974 Chicago Coin Twin Skeet Shoot




Twin Skeet Shoot uses Chicago Coin introduced in 1974 (exact date unknown) featured twin Dale style gun (not a light gun) which can be played by 2 players in 8-track tape game with an electronic target sound.

One in the series of three 1970s twin rifle games including Chicago Coin'sTwin Rifle (1971) and Midway'sTwin Pirate (1974).

unlimited shots in a timed game, one target appears and moves and the quickest and more accurate player gets the points. It has a black light. Twin SkeetShoot is not as quick as Twin Rifle though because Skeet Shoot uses an optical illusion to make the target look like it is moving,even after being shoot. Unlike the Twin Rifle which puts up a new target after the current target is hit making it much faster and wild, especially in a two player mode.

Federal agencies recall or issue warnings about hundreds of products every year in order to prevent injury to consumers . Most recalls are carried out voluntarily by manufacturers under the supervision of the Federal agency responsible for the product category involved. Product hazards may occur because of design flaws, production defects, new scientific information about dangers from materials previously thought safe, accidental contamination, tampering, unforeseen misuse of products, or failure to meet safety standards.


The Arcadia Electronic Skeet Shoot game sets an indoor image projecting game systems that include Duck Shoot and Deer Hunter games. The game sets includes a toy pump-action rifle with a simulated laser scope and realistic shooting sounds when fired. The Duck Shoot game has a gray rifle and projector while The Deer Hunter game has a camouflage rifle and projector.

"ARCADIA ELECTRONIC SKEET SHOOT" is written on a label on the projector and written on the bottom is "1998 TOYMAX," "PATENT PENDING" and "MADE IN CHINA." Meteor Attack and Fighter Attack game cartridges, which are used with the Arcadia Electronic Skeet Shoot games, are sold separately. The Meteor Attack cartridge is silver and the Fighter Attack cartridge is black.


Toymax has received 100 reports of projectors overheating, melting and smoking. A consumer reportedly suffering a minor burn injury on the hand, and damages included two scorched carpets and one scorched bedspread Consumers should stop using these games immediately and remove the game cartridge from the console.


In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Toymax Inc., of Plainview, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling approximately 435,000 Arcadia Electronic Skeet Shoot games to replace the game cartridges. The skeet shoot games' cartridges can be defective, and can cause the projector to overheat, melt and smoke, presenting a risk of burns to its consumers.

Toy and discount department stores nationwide, including Toys R Us, Sam's Club, K-B Toys and Costco, sold these games from October 1998 through March 2000 for about $65.

New and replacement game cartridges are orange and all the Arcadia Electronic Skeet Shoot games cartridges that are not orange should be replaced.
CPSC regulates the safety of toys such as household products, furniture,appliances and lawnmowers; recreational equipment; and some off-road vehiclessuch as snowmobiles. The agency recalls approximately 250 products a year,almost all the recalls handled voluntarily by manufacturers under agency'ssupervision.

Depending onthe kindof product, recall or warning information sometimes may be included withbilling notices from stores or with replacement parts, or appear on posters indoctors' offices, day care centers, stores, and repair shops. Recalls are publicized to consumers through the media.