This historic M.G. Company took its name from "Morris Garages". Originally a retailer of Morris cars in Oxford , it's founder William Richard Morris, 1st Viscount Nuffield decided to start producing his own customized versions in 1924. Initially, the cars had both Morris and M.G. badges. The famous eight-sided badge was only officially launched a year later in 1925. The first cars produced were re-bodied Morris cars that used coachwork from the firm Carbodies in Coventry and were assembled in Alfred Lane. Space requirements there necessitated a move to larger premises in Bainton Road in September 1925. By 1928, the company had become the M.G. Car Company Limited. The first time a stand was taken was at the London Motor Show that same year . Several more production expansions followed.
William Morris sold the company to Morris Motors (itself part of the Nuffield Organization) in 1935. This return to the world of badge-engineering began a process that was to have disastrous consequences for the company, especially in terms of its motor-sporting prowess. M.G. was absorbed by the British Motor Corporation in 1952. Swept up by an unhealthy mix of economic, internal and external politics in the 1970's, the M.G. factory was shut down in terms of a ruthless program to turn B.M.C. (later British Leyland) around. Later variants of M.G.'s built by the Austin Rover Group were thinly-disguised Austins made at Longbridge. This turned a once-famous sports car firm in the laughing stock of Britain's motorists. It also turned it's pre-war cars into collectibles overnight.


After British Leyland became the Rover Group in 1986, ownership of M.G. passed to British Aerospace in 1988, and then on to BMW in 1994. BMW sold the business in 2000, when M.G. became part of the M.G. Rover Group based in Longbridge, Birmingham. The practice of selling more desirable M.G. sports cars alongside badge-engineered Rovers continued. The Group finally went into receivership in 2005, and car production was immediately suspended. In July 2005, the Nanjing Automobile Group purchased the rights to the M.G. name and the assets of the M.G. Rover Group for fifty-three million pounds. Its new Chinese owners stated that the brand would stand for something new in China. MG general manager Zhang Xin added we want Chinese consumers to know this brand as ' Modern Gentleman '. In Europe though it still stands for ' Morris Garages '. In 2006, it was reported that Project Kimber led by David James had entered talks with Nanjing to buy the M.G. brand in order to produce a range of sports cars based on the discontinued Smart Roadster design by Daimler-Chrysler . No agreement was reached and it was later announced that the re-launched Smart Roadster would bear the A.C. name instead. Nanjing commenced production of the M.G. TF and ZT ranges in early 2007 instead. The TF was built from scratch at Longbridge, while the ZT (now called the MG 7) was assembled in China. Following a series of business debacles, the M.G. range was relaunched in Britain during 2008. Later the same year, the company returned to overseas markets too. Since then, the brand that was once an athlete in the motoring world has moved beyond the chunky MGB cars that were so popular
Fans of the M.G. believe it should be up there with Jaguar and Rolls Royce among the best-known list of British cars. Perhaps that's why they have a global following today with classic and vintage car enthusiasts.
Before the war, Morris Garages had produced a variety of sedan and sporting cars, all of which are now eagerly sought-after by collectors of pre-war memorabilia.

Although M.G. did produce low numbers of closed coupes before the war, they are better known for their sports cars that epitomized country lanes and castles. Many of them were also modified for track use at the Brooklands motor racing circuit, where they reinforced the brand. Club racing was popular too, for the cheeky little cars lent themselves ideally to this popular weekend hobby.

After the war, M.G. continued manufacturing stylish sporting motorcars that helped cheer the grey of postwar Britain. Eventually though, the firm was absorbed into the B.M.C. motoring empire which sought to rationalize the industry. Soon their saloons were little more than re-badged porridge. Fortunately, their sports cars remained classic M.G.s throughout, sharing just some chassis and mechanical parts with their stodgy Austin and Morris stablemates.

After the war, the TC was developed into the TD and then the TF, by which time (it was the 1950s) the design was getting seriously fated. The MGA that followed on the TF was light years away in terms of styling, and brought the sporting arm of M.G. back into focus.

The MGB followed to become perhaps the most popular sporting car ever, especially in the UK. In fact the MGB soldiered on, with only minor updates to the seventies, when, thanks to American safety legislation, the MGB and Midget suffered the indignity of having ungainly rubber bumpers stuck on as an afterthought.

The re-jigged Midgets and MGBs featured in British Leyland's sales catalogs for a few more years. However their rubber bumpers had emasculated them in many minds. In fact, when finally pensioned off in the early 1980s they were outdated and almost an embarrassment to British industry. The MGB was not directly replaced. British Leyland chose to concentrate its 'sports car' image on the Triumph TR7 instead, which was by any mind an ugly anachronism. Throughout the 1980s the M.G. badge adorned the plastic grilles of several tweaked Austin Rovers that were little more than rust buckets and hatchbacks, and did further damage to a once-legendary badge.

In the nineties, Rover manufactured a limited run of M.G. RV8 roadsters, (to emphasize that M.G. was more than a badged-up Metro or a family Montego). This was part of the build-up to the launch of the two-seater MGF range which it was hoped would re-energize the brand. The MGF brought M.G. back from extinction. In fact, in revised MGTF form it's still in production today, continuing to feature it's novel mid-engine layout, and, in some examples, trick variable valve timing.

Throughout the highs and lows of contemporary M.G. production, classic and vintage precursors continued to be restored and loved by enthusiasts across the world. This spawned a large support industry that makes running an old M.G. relatively painless - at least when it comes to finding parts - paying for them is a different matter sometimes though.

Although the MGA announced in 1955 set new standards for M.G. in terms of cracking performance and curvacious styling, by the beginning of the 1960's it had become out-dated and sales were falling. Sports car design had generally moved up a gear in all departments, especially in terms of saloon car-levels of refinement. And that's why fickle sports car buyers demanded more sophistication than the MGA was able to deliver after so few years. A replacement car was urgently required. One that would offer enhanced performance and comfort, while maintaining the M.G. sporting image.
Monocoque construction was also becoming entrenched in car manufacture. This was a method whereby a body shell constructed from a number of metal panels clad a series of welded steel box sections on a reinforced floor pan. This in turn both provided mountings for all mechanical components, and absorbed all the loads from the suspension that gave the car its rigidity. The other advantage was a much lighter car, which had obvious performance benefits, especially for a sports car.
The monocoque design of the MGB was a huge departure from the design of the MGA that it replaced, causing something of a stir among traditionalists. At the front, the inner wing panels, front panel, and engine compartment bulkhead formed one box; the scuttle bulkhead, and front floor formed another rigid section. The rear inner wings, boot floor, and rear panels created the third separate rigid structure. Box section strengthening pieces were added to the floor for stiffening. These also supplied mountings for the rear suspension - while further box sections ran along the bottoms of the front inner wings for the front suspension and the engine mounts.


The front suspension and steering were similar the MGA though, but with minor changes At the rear were familiar semi-elliptic springs controlled by lever-arm dampers. The engine and transmission were also sourced from the MGA stock room, again with some enhancements. The 4-cylinder B-series power plant was bored out from 1622cc to 1789cc, which resulted in a 94bhp power output. A diaphragm clutch was installed between the engine and transmission, while as standard the car was fitted with bolt-on steel wheels, these being of a slightly smaller diameter than before to improve high speed gearing. The 2-seater open roadster came complete with squared-off styling complemented by curved windscreen, a removable hard-top, and doors that even had wind-up windows with hinged quarter lights.

In the cockpit, driver and passenger had separate bucket seats and full instrumentation, plus a cover to pull over the space behind the seats when the hood was down. Although the MGB was slightly shorter than its predecessor the MGA, it's cockpit was roomier, allowing for larger and more comfortable seating. All-in-all, a great improvement for Britain in the Swinging Sixties.

The following year options were added in the form of transmission overdrive, center-locking wire wheels and a folding soft-top that could be stowed behind the seats. In 1964, the engine was provided with a far stronger bottom end, as fitted in the Austin/Morris/Wolseley/Riley1800cc saloon range. This made the car's engine even more robust than it was before.

1965 heralded the introduction of the much-awaited MGB coupe named the MGB GT. This car really stood out from the crowd with its attractive closed version of the standard,open body. While the front end, wings, and doors were essentially the same as fitted to the roadster, the windscreen was slightly higher to allow for a higher roof line. This ran back in a gentle curve across the doors and rear side windows, before sloping quite dramatically down into the rear panel. Finally a larger hinged tailgate replaced the roadster boot, making the GT version a little like a scaled-down "shooting brake". In fact, some say the MGB GT was the world's first hatchback car.

The small rear seat was not much use for anything except for carrying children. However, the seat could also be folded down to create a load platform for larger luggage, converting the GT to a really useful two-seat touring car. Although the coupe bodywork made it much heavier, its shape improved performance through better aerodynamics. This gave the GT a slightly higher top speed than the roadster. It also improved its handling thanks to more weight over the rear wheels and increased rigidity. On the downside though, the added weight retarded acceleration. Overall the MGB GT was not only a good-looking car, but offered saloon car comfort levels with sports car performance. Hence the MGB GT's main market discriminator was that it was a tad more civilized than the roadster.

In 1967, a new variant known as the MGB Mark II was introduced. It continued to be available in both open-top and GT forms. The most significant difference though was that the new model now had had synchromesh gear changing on all four gears, coupled to a better set of ratios. A wider transmission tunnel allowed M.G. to offer the option of automatic transmission. This it hoped would attract new customers for the product.

I n the same year a new M.G. Sports model was added to the range. While based on (and sharing the same body and appearance as the existing M.G. this added a wide bulge right across the bonnet, reminiscent of the Austin-Healey 3000, a car that was considered by now to have had its day. By squeezing its giant three-liter 6-cylinder cast-iron lump into the car, M.G. had created the promise of an awesome M.G. sports model, with much more in the way of performance, and power quite any previously known bearer of an M.G. badge. Sadly - despite the obvious power to weight ratio advantage - the engine was heavy and the basically unchanged car design not well balanced. Whilst performing well enough in a straight line, it was a bit unwieldy when negotiating bends, a point brutally focused on by an unsympathetic press.

Like its market rivals in the late 1960's, M.G. cars found themselves affected by exhaust emission and safety legislation, both of which required frequent modifications to the specifications of its cars This was especially true for those models intended for exportation, particularly those going to America. Detail modifications continued through to 1970, when the most obvious change was made to the car. This was the addition of a matt-black recessed grille and bumper set with no obvious link to the M.G. character of old. Other changes included modified rear lights, rostyle sculpted steel wheels, and revised interior fittings, all of which were reminiscent of cheap sedan cars that a sporting heritage. The famous SU HIF carburettors were also tweaked, in an effort to reduce exhaust emissions further.

In 1973, another big-engined MGB appeared. This was unlike the MGC Sports car, because this time a V8 motor was fitted. This proved so popular that demand soon exceeded supply. Nobody seemed bothered that it didn't have a different model name this time. The power plant was a 3532cc alloy Rover V8 engine as supplied across the Land Rover Range Rover, and also to the bigger-engined Rover Saloons. Although it was descended from an earlier Buick design, the unit was actually lightweight - even where compared with the original B-series MGB engine.


In standard tune it pumped out a healthy 137bhp. Only minor alterations were required to the engine bulkhead to achieve a neat fit. With the development of a low-rise exhaust manifold the MGB V8 could still use the standard MGB bonnet too. What's more, the engine could be fitted (and exchanged) without the removal of the front suspension cross member, and so the original coil-spring suspension could be retained, unlike in the case of the MGC. The standard MGB suspension was installed at the rear too, although the ride height was increased by one inch. The transmission was still all MGC, beginning at the gear box right through to the rear axle - although there were slight changes to the ratios themselves.

Mating the Rover V8 engine and the MGB body produced an excellent touring car with high performance, good economy, and with reasonable handling properties too. The media received it well. After that, it found a ready market in Britain, although never actually exported to the USA. Life for the MGB came abruptly to an end in 1976. The official reason was the limited supply of engines, which were built under license from Buick and had been earmarked for the new Rover SD1 saloon. Another contributory factor was the fuel crisis, which was causing motorists to buy smaller-engined and more economical cars. It does seem strange though that production stopped when things were going well. It was being sold in greater numbers than the V8 Triumph Stag, and that car continued to be built in numbers for a while still. However, the Stag was also to disappear after a relatively short production run, the reason this time being poor quality, and its reputation for continually breaking down - certainly few people bought it, and that included the Americans who lost interest in two short years.

The M.G. that was a production success was thus forsaken for one that was a failure - and both were large-engined too. The only possible explanation is either feeble minds at British Leyland, or an obsession with turning the new Rover into a success. What a pity, after such a bold move forward with that magnificent Buick engine.

However it wasn't British Leyland that were the first to drop the Rover V8 into an MGB. In fact a former Mini racer / car tuner Ken Costello set the scene, when he up-graded an MGB by swapping its heavy cast-iron straight four 'B-Series' lump with a V8 from the same American power plant. It was not long before engineers at Abingdon heard of this. In fact the then Leyland supremo Lord Stokes invited Costello to demonstrate one of his M.G. V8 conversions to his team. By August 1971, M.G. was already contemplating its own V8 prototype, a refinement that was launched to the market two years later.

Prior to this time, Costello had been making a good living selling customized MGB's with the 3.5 liter V8 installed. He was fortunate that he didn't need to pass through approval procedures, because his vehicles were post-market cars. However, when MG launched its own MGB GT V8, Costello found that the supply of parts essential to his own V8 conversions began to dry up, and he began to realize that this squeeze could put him out of business soon. Undaunted, he tracked down a cheaper supply of Buick V8's in Belgium, from where he imported lorry-loads of them - all second hand. No wonder British Leyland was slowly crumbling. Some say it deserved it, and it's workers too, what with all their strikes.

Meantime the 4-cylinder MGB's soldiered on. In 1974 though something really silly happened to both the MGB and the MG Midget. They were fitted with large ugly black rubber bumpers. This was necessary in order to comply with new regulations that demanded cars be made to withstand a 5mph collision without sustaining any damage. The principle was good. However the design was disastrous. Not only was the appearance of the cars spoiled by the new bumpers, but the ride height of both was increased, which did nothing to preserve a respectably low center of gravity. The front bumper was shaped to merge into the grille, which at least had a token resemblance to the earlier and familiar shape (or so the manufacturer claimed). As with the Midget, the weight of the bumpers and increased ride height spoiled their handling characteristics, increasing body-roll and making them prone to over-steer. In 1976, an attempt was made to rectify this by fitting stabilizers to the front and rear suspension. This improved the handling of the cars, but they were still downright ugly, like a swan retrofitted into a duck.

The MGB continued with minor detail changes until production finally staggered to an end in 1980 when few customers wished to buy it. With no replacement model waiting in the wings this looked like the bitter end for the famous and historic sportscar manufacturer. The parent company British Leyland seemed reluctant to invest any more money in the cars, preferring instead to finance the Triumph name. British Leyland claimed they were losing money on every MGB built, but that seems hard to believe, since there were few substantial changes to the cars specification over the years, meaning that development costs would have been recouped long before the end.

Not only was this the end for the MGB and Midget, but it was also the end of the Abingdon plant. When closure of the plant was announced there was public outrage - not only within Britain, but all around the world. It seemed that British Leyland had not realized the strength of the emotions of M.G. enthusiasts, and indeed just how many enthusiasts there were. This, they realized far too late, had made the M.G. name a valuable commodity.

The factory and M.G. were given a brief stay of execution with the production of the MG RV8, a car that was in effect a retro-styled two seat sports model with the general appearance of the MGB roadster, and still powered by the Rover V8. However, the production run was short, and the car was almost stillborn.

The M.G. badge is owned by the Rover Group and appears on sport versions of Rover saloons, as well as the popular MGF two seaters being built today. Tastes and ideas may have changed in this modern world of car production - and indeed with the buying public too - but no M.G. will ever claim the loyalty enjoyed by those older and more authentic motor cars. Although the MGB is a ruggedly built and relatively simple sports car, it can present some restoration challenges for the amateur restorer. Being the best-selling British sports car in America up to 1980, there are plenty of MGB's available for restoring. In fact you could find one in your local classified advertisements, in an internet auction, just happen to spot one parked under a tree near your house which could be your dream. In any case, unless you buy an example that has been renovated from the ground up, you are likely to meet up with some of the common weaknesses of the car. In that case, you either need to either apply your own skills, or find reputable help.

Engine

The B-series engine is actually one of the sturdiest around, and, with the exception of general wear and tear on high mileage cars, it's likely to be in far condition if the car is still a runner. When you start it up, expect to hear audible rocker noise from the top end of the engine. In fact, an absence of the reassuring ticking noise may mean that overworked rockers have been over-tightened to hide visible wear. Rumbling from the bottom end means a worn crank and main bearings though. A chattering timing chain is another sign of wear, but fortunately timing chains can be replaced quite quickly, and with the engine still in the car.

The presence of water in the oil is a sure sign of a blown head gasket and potentially a cracked or warped head too. If the oil inside the valve cover is frothing at idle, this indicates severe bore and / or valve guide wear. Oil leaks are common near the timing chain and gearbox bell housing covers, the drain hole, and the tappet side covers. When on the road, remember to look for proper oil pressure of 50psi in fourth gear with the engine warmed up properly. A significantly lower reading might mean either a faulty oil pressure sending unit, a worn oil pump, or worn engine bearings. Running hot indicates a tired water pump, a blocked radiator, or even burned exhaust valves.

The safest bet is to have a professional shop replace an entire worn MGB engine with a rebuilt unit. A properly rebuilt and installed MGB engine could last for 100,000 miles when properly maintained.

Transmission and Drive Train

MGBs used a three synchromesh transmission up to and including 1967, and this is the unitmost likely to give trouble as it is less robust (and spares parts are hard to find too). On all MGB transmissions versions noises and grindings are caused by worn bearings, gear teeth, or thrust-washers. Also look for the gear lever jumping out of second or third gear when the clutch is not engaged.

More than an inch or so of play in the clutch pedal indicates a worn master or slave cylinder that will require immediate replacement. Clutch replacement is best accomplished through the removal of the engine and transmission. Not an easy task for an amateur to do. Faulty over-drive transmissions may be suffering from clogged filters, low transmission fluid level or a number of electrical faults. If early overdrive transmissions fail to come in or out of third or fourth gear, a worn solenoid switch may be your culprit.

The rear axle on an MGB may leak to due faulty seals, a clogged vent, or just careless overfilling. A slight clonking as the axle is engages is actually acceptable, but excessive noise will require attention to the rear differential. Worn half-shafts can be detected by coming on and off the power several times at about 30mph, while listening for excessive clonking from the rear end. You should also check the u-bolts for tightness, as loose u-bolts will cause the rear end to wander on turns. Be sure to also check the leaf springs for signs of wearing, sagging, or even cracking.

Suspension and Steering

The best indicators of front suspension wear are excessive body lurch on corners, and a tendency for the car to generally wander. Bounce the front end of the car above each front wheel to test the strength of the hydraulic dampers. It is also a good idea to jack up the front end and spin each front wheel to check for problems with the bearings. At the same time you should also rock or shake each wheel in a vertical plane to check for worn king-pins. There should ideally be no more than one inch of play - with the car stationary - on the steering wheel.

More play than this indicates a worn universal steering joint. If the steering doesn't center while at speed, the king pins are likely to blame. When inspecting wire wheels, look for loose or broken spokes. While a professional can tighten loose spokes, broken spokes are best addressed by replacing the entire wheel with a good used or new replacement. Wire wheel and hub splines must also be inspected for wear. Worn splines are indicated by clonking at the wheels on acceleration.

Of course extremely splines mean you are going nowhere fast! MGB steel wheels, often referred to as rostyle wheels, require far less maintenance, and are practically indestructible. The intricately painted pattern is often spoiled in a misguided attempt to repaint the wheel. While paint templates are available to make painting easier, the best bet it to take the time to carefully clean and mask off the pattern, and then prime and repaint.

This is well worth the extra effort, and you can rest assured that your fellow MGB enthusiasts will notice the time you spent. Early MGB's had a simple steel wheel and small hubcap that, while difficult to find, are fairly easy to maintain.

Brakes

Worn brake pads and shoes, or seized calipers can cause an MGB to pull to one side during braking. Worn rotors can be turned or replaced at minimal cost. In fact all of the mechanical braking components are relatively inexpensive and readily available too .

Check for faulty hydraulics by repeatedly depressing the brake pedal and seeing if the pedal eventually goes all the way to the floor. Brake master cylinders can be rebuilt, but it maybe worth having a professional do the job, since brake fluid is your paint jobs absolute worst enemy. If the brake-warning light comes on when the brake pedal is depressed as hard as possible, then the rear brakes are likely leaking at the wheel cylinders.

In some instances, oil from the rear differential can contaminate the rear brake drums (especially if the rear end is not properly maintained) In this case, a complete brake rebuilt on the rear end is required, while the breather on the rear axle should be cleaned and / or replaced.

Body

The MGB sheet-metal body is basically well built and designed, but like any other steel-bodied car is prone to rust - particularly in regions with extreme winter weather. The sills (lower interior body area between wheels) provide most of the MGB structural support, and serious rust problems here go beyond a cosmetic issue to become a question of safety. Extremely rotten sills can cause an MGB to actually sag in the middle.

A good way to check for this is to look at the vertical door gaps. If the gap is tight at the top and wide at the bottom then a problem is indicated. This is a particular problem for MGB roadsters, as they have no fixed roof for addition strength and support. While rusted sills need not necessarily be a death sentence for an MGB, they should only be repaired by a professional. The front fenders rust at the base next to the sill.

Rust will often appear around the wheel arches and at the point where the fenders meet the main part of the body. Rust also occurs at the inner portion of the fenders, and on the front apron under the bumper. Doors can rust badly along their bottom edges too. Another flaw to look out for is a crack in the door that appears just under the quarter-window due to a structural design flaw (and the tendency of drivers to pull on the quarter window when closing the door). You should also take the time to examine the underside of the car and the floorboards - especially below the dash.

Many owners of MGBs allowed rain to fall inside their cars, mistakenly thinking the process of evaporation would deal with the moisture. This was not true! The moist conditions tended to remain under the factory-installed mats, and remained there until floorboards rotted through. Also pay special attention to the jacking points and suspension mounting points. At the rear of an MGB the fenders tend to rust where the inner and outer fenders meet and where the sheet metal is beaded at the top of the fender.

Rust often appears at the base of the tail lamps, as well as the inside of the trunk.. Check the trunk floor and lid for rust that often appears near the trunk lid supports, and around the luggage racks. An obvious sign of damage to a trunk lid is a crimp in the metal near the support, where a previous owner improperly attempted to close the trunk without first depressing the latch on the support. Fortunately late-1980's new body panels (in fact a brand new MGB body shell) can be purchased from the UK distributors.

These body parts utilize the original tooling from the MGB factory, so while more expensive ensure the best fit and finish. Less expensive aftermarket body parts are also available from other manufacturers, and sometimes you get lucky and find good fenders, hoods, and trunk lids at import salvage yards. You get what you pay for when it comes to professional bodywork. Ensuring that panels fit correctly and remain aligned requires an experienced touch.

Quality repairs are not always inexpensive, but you will appreciate the investment you make in this area, each and everytime you admire your restored MGB.

Interior

The interiors of many MGBs have been neglected, or have been subjected to some creative modification s. In the best case ,your restoration project should have a complete, but well-worn, original interior. In America, only early MGBs left dealers with leather seats. By the 1968, MGBs had rather poorly executed vinyl seating, padded dashes and thin interior panels. Carpeting was also fairly minimal and generally less than luxurious.

While American cars were fitted with molded padded vinyl dashes, UK cars kept their original metal dashes with updated gauges, knobs, and switches, - much nicer looking, but less safe, according to the experts. On most unrestored MGB's expect to spend a considerable amount of time and or money bringing the interior to original (or better) condition. Currently, leather seating and panel kits are available as are more plush carpet kits too.

A quality wooden inlay dash can upgrade the appearance of the US spec, although it will deviate from the original design. You can even upgrade your steering wheel, but remember that factory-installed wheels have a large diameter because MGB's don't have power steering.

An unrestored car is also likely to need a new convertible top. The vinyl tops tend to be torn from improper folding and storage. The top frames are ruggedly designed though, and even those that do not raise and lower smoothly can be cured with some oil. For just a few hundred dollars you can get a new, high-quality aftermarket vinyl top with a zip out rear window.

Only those with experience and patience should install an MGB soft top by themselves. To ensure a quality fit, trust an expert.

Which MGB to Buy?

Since you will be investing a considerable amount of time, energy, and most importantly money in an MGB restoration, it important to have an idea of the value of the car when the work is complete. Of course, this depends greatly on the quality of the restoration work, which is not always proportionate to the amount of money you have spent. An unscrupulous mechanic can charge you a fortune and not perform the work correctly or even perform it at all (make sure to get documentation and receipts for all work done).

In general, chrome bumper MGBs (1963-1974) with overdrive transmissions remain the most sought after and therefore hold the highest value. Furthermore, they tend to increase in value at a higher rate than the later rubber bumper MGBs. Among the chrome bumper cars the earliest years 1963-1965 tend to be the most valuable. These early MGBs are terribly simple machines, with little or no add-ons to the engine like pollution control or suspect British Leyland technology .

Early MGBs are considered to be the true essence of the car without pin striping, safety bumpers, or even a radio! The styling of the grilles on chrome-bumper MGB's evolved over 1963-1974 from vertically slatted grills, to recessed grills and culminating with a rather cheaply manufactured black egg crates. People have their own personal preferences with respect to grills, but make sure to keep it original, as an incorrect grill on your MGB will draw criticism from enthusiasts, and reduce the return on your investment.

The chrome bumpers themselves also underwent minor changes with different over-riders being added, and even a split rear bumper on the 1970 models. While just a subtle variation on the theme, the split rear bumper is generally considered desirable and enthusiasts actively seek out these cars. Less desirable are the large black-overriders that were mounted on 1974 MGB's just prior to the changeover to all-rubber front and rear bumpers. These are easily removed and replaced with chrome overriders, or none at all.

1975-1980 MGB's are easily identified by the controversial black rubber bumpers on the front and the rear of the cars. 1975 MGB's are considered by some to be the low point for the model. The execution of the heavy steel reinforced bumpers was not initially well thought-out and threw the balance of the car. This was made worse by the lack of suspension sway bars. By 1976, they had finally gotten it just about right, and the 1977 cars also featured an updated more modern dashboard.

However pollution control equipment was strangling the little four-cylinder engine further, limiting performance. In 1979, the MGB Limited Edition was offered with special body striping, alloy wheels, and subtle interior upgrades. Of all the rubber bumper cars, this is probably the one to look for. MGB GTs are also wonderful variations on the MGB theme. They offer all the pleasures of driving the classic car with better protection from the elements. Often, the interiors of GT models are better preserved too, so restoring one could save the owner some money. If you live in a warm climate though, be careful, because they can get toasty in July!

Which One's For Me?

The right MGB is a personal decision. Is the car intended to be a casual weekend toy, a show stopper, or an investment? There is a range of MGB's available to satisfy just about everybody! Buy yours today. You won't regret it.

