You may check the stove twenty times to make sure it's really turned off, you're your hands until they're scrubbed raw, or drive around for hours to make sure that the bump you heard while driving wasn't a person you ran over.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is an anxiety disorder characterized by uncontrollable, unwanted thoughts and repetitive, ritualized behaviors you feel compelled to perform. If you have OCD, you probably recognize that your obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors are irrational - but even so, you feel unable to resist them and break free.



It's normal, on occasion, to go back and double-check that the iron is unplugged or your car is locked. But in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors become so excessive that they interfere with daily life. And no matter what you do, you can't seem to shake them.

If you or someone you love has obsessive-compulsive disorder, you may feel isolated and helpless, but there is help available. Many treatments and self-help strategies can reduce the symptoms of OCD. Usually, compulsions are performed in an attempt to make obsessions go away. For example, if you're afraid of contamination, you might develop elaborate cleaning rituals. However, the relief never lasts. In fact, the obsessive thoughts usually come back stronger. And the compulsive behaviors often end up causing anxiety themselves as they become more demanding and time-consuming.

Just because you have obsessive thoughts or perform compulsive behaviors does NOT mean that you have obsessive-compulsive disorder. Many people have mild obsessions or compulsions that are strange or irrational, but they're still able to lead their lives without much disruption. But with obsessive-compulsive disorder, these thoughts and behaviors cause tremendous distress, take up a lot of time, and interfere with your daily routine, job, or relationships.
Most people with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have both obsessions and compulsions, but some people experience just one or the other. The symptoms of OCD may wax and wane over time. Often, the symptoms get worse in times of stress. Common obsessive thoughts in OCD include: Fear of being contaminated by germs or dirt or contaminating others Fear of causing harm to yourself or others Intrusive sexually explicit or violent thoughts and images Excessive focus on religious or moral ideas Fear of losing or not having things you might need Order and symmetry: the idea that everything must line up "just right." Superstitions; excessive attention to something considered lucky or unlucky Common compulsive behaviors in OCD include: Excessive double-checking of things, such as locks, appliances, and switches. Repeatedly checking in on loved ones to make sure they're safe. Counting, tapping, repeating certain words, or doing other senseless things to reduce anxiety. Spending a lot of time washing or cleaning. Ordering, evening out, or arranging things "just so." Praying excessively or engaging in rituals triggered by religious fear. Accumulating "junk" such as old newspapers, magazines, and empty food containers, or other things you don't have a use for.

A person with checkers OCD is one who checks constantly to prevent something bad from happening. Some common concerns of a checker are checking to make sure the stove has been turned off, or the iron has been turned off. The checker thinks if the stove or iron has not been turned off a fire will start and the house will burn down. The checker gets caught up in hours of repeated checking and doubting of the same thing. Allowing someone else to lock up the house is a way of getting the check out of the house or to go on with his or her day.

Washers and cleaners are worried about contamination by certain objects or situations, such as germs, disease, and bodily secretions. To make sure there is no chance of contamination the washer and cleaner will create one or more rituals of taking a long shower, washing their hands repeatedly, and cleaning their house for hours. The washing and cleaning is done to prevent death and illness. The washing and cleaning can go form one half hour up to ten hours. The washer and cleaner will avoid anything that they think is contaminated.

Repeaters are those who repeat their actions. When a fearful thought enter their mind they feel the need to repeat the some action to keep the thoughts from coming true. The repeater is like the checker in trying to prevent something bad from happening. However, the repeater can tell the difference between obsession and compulsion. An example of a repeater preventing a spouse from dying would be getting dressed and undressed until the thoughts of death are gone.


Orders are people who want things around them arranged in a certain way of symmetrical patterns. Orders utilize lots of time making sure things are in the right place and will notice right away when the pattern of something has been changed. They usually get upset when something of theirs has been rearranged or things are not perfect. For example an orderer will lay out their daily medication of vitamins in a special design on the kitchen counter rearranging the design every time a pill or vitamin is taken.

A hoarder collects objects or things that they find impossible to get rid of. A hoarder will collect things and put them away with the intent of using them in the future. An example of a hoarder is when a person collects newspapers for a long time thinks they will need a specific article.

The thinker ritualize has repetitive thoughts or images to counteract their anxiety provoking thoughts or images, the obsession. The patterns of the thinker ritualizer is closely related to the repeaters, except the thoughts are repetitious ritualistic instead of behaviors. Praying repeating specific words or phrases, and counting are the most common rituals of the ritualizer. For example, Stuart, a thinker ritualizer associated a number to bad luck and a number to good luck. When a thought with the numbers that Stuart associated with good or bad luck would enter his mind he would repeat the number six or several times to stop bad luck or good lock. Thinking ritualizer will try to remember events in detail and repeat a mental list to ensure safety. For example, a sixty seven year old man spent hours tested his memory every day by trying to remember unimportant events in order to prevent Alzheimer disease.

Worriers and Pure Obsessional have repetitious negative thoughts that they can control and are very upsetting to them. The worrier does not experience any repetitious behavior, such as checking or hand washing, or any thinking compulsions. The worriers and pure obsessional worries about health problems, past traumatic events, or failing at some task in the future. An example of some one not demonstrating any compulsive behavior that could temporary alleviate their distress would be someone worrying about losing all of their saving in the market crash and not being able to educate their children. A severe example would be shameful images of inappropriate sexual behavior, or impulses to kill or hurt themselves or their love ones. Afterward, the person may dwell on how these thoughts may come true for hours or days.



Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) symptoms in children

While the onset of obsessive-compulsive disorder usually occurs during adolescence or young adulthood, younger children sometimes have symptoms that look like OCD. However, the symptoms of other disorders, such as ADD, autism, and Tourette's syndrome can also look like obsessive-compulsive disorder, so a thorough medical and psychological exam is essential before any diagnosis is made. It's also important to note that OCD is an anxiety disorder, and in children, the symptoms of anxiety usually change over time. So a child with OCD symptoms will not necessarily have OCD as an adult. What's most important is to make environmental and behavioral changes to reduce your child's anxiety.

There are many effective treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), ranging from therapy to self-help and medication. However, the treatment for OCD with the most research supporting its effectiveness is cognitive-behavioral therapy.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder involves two components: Exposure and response prevention Cognitive therapy- The cognitive therapy component for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) focuses on the catastrophic thoughts and exaggerated sense of responsibility you feel. A big part of cognitive therapy for OCD is teaching you healthy and effective ways of responding to obsessive thoughts, without


Exposure and response prevention involves repeated exposure to the source of your obsession. Then you are asked to refrain from the compulsive behavior you'd usually perform to reduce your anxiety.

For example, if you are a compulsive hand washer, you might be asked to touch the door handle in a public restroom and then be prevented from washing up. As you sit with the anxiety, the urge to wash your hands will gradually begin to go away on its own. In this way, you learn that you don't need the ritual to get rid of your anxiety - that you have some control over your obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors.

Studies show that exposure and response prevention can actually "retrain" the brain, permanently reducing the occurrence of obsessive-compulsive disorder symptoms. This type of OCD therapy can even extinguish compulsive behaviors entirely. Other treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)

In addition to cognitive-behavioral therapy, the following treatments are also used for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD): - Antidepressants are sometimes used in conjunction with therapy for the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. However, medication alone is rarely effective in relieving the symptoms of OCD. - Because OCD often causes problems in family life and social adjustment, family therapy is often advised. Family therapy promotes understanding of the disorder and can help reduce family conflicts. It can also motivate family members and teach them how to help their loved one. - Group therapy is another helpful obsessive-compulsive disorder treatment. Through interaction with fellow OCD sufferers, group therapy provides support and encouragement and decreases feelings of isolation. Self-help for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)

If you have obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), you can help yourself in many ways. Educating yourself about the disorder is a vital first step. It's also important to practice the cognitive-behavioral techniques you've learned from therapy on your own. Renowned OCD researcher Jeffrey Schwartz emphasizes the importance of self-treatment on a day-to-day basis. Four Steps for Conquering Obsessive Thoughts and Compulsive Urges

Psychiatrist Jeffrey Schwartz, author of Brain Lock: Free Yourself from Obsessive-Compulsive Behavior, offers the following four steps for dealing with OCD: RELABEL - Recognize that the intrusive obsessive thoughts and urges are the RESulT OF OCD. REATTRIBUTE - Realize that the intensity and intrusiveness of the thought or urge is CAUSED BY OCD; it is probably related to a biochemical imbalance in the brain. REFOCUS - Work around the OCD thoughts by focusing your attention on something else, at least for a few minutes: DO ANOTHER BEHAVIOR. REVALUE - Do not take the OCD thought at face value. It Is not significant in itself.


Dealing with and obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors: Learn everything you can about OCD. Read books on the disorder and talk to your therapist and doctor. The more you know, the better able you will be to manage your symptoms. You can find many books about OCD at local or online bookstores. . Using the skills you've learned in therapy, actively work toward eliminating your obsessions and compulsive behaviors. This is a challenge that requires commitment and daily practice. Obsessions and compulsions can consume your life to the point of social isolation. In turn, social isolation can aggravate your OCD. It's important to have a network of family and friends you can turn to for help and support. Involving others in your treatment can help guard against setbacks and keep you motivated. You're not alone in your struggle with OCD, and participating in a support group is an effective reminder of that. In a support group, you can share your experience and learn from others who are going through the same thing you are. Click here to search the Obsessive Compulsive Foundation's support group database. Meditation, yoga, deep breathing, and other stress relief techniques may help reduce the symptoms of anxiety brought on by OCD. Mindfulness meditation may be particularly helpful to OCD sufferers. Helping a loved one with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)

If your friend or family member has OCD, your most important job is to educate yourself about the disorder. Learn everything you can about the disorder and make sure your loved one has access to information about it as well. Share what you've learned with your friend or family member and let them know there is help available. Simply knowing the condition is treatable may provide enough motivation to get them into a therapist's office. How to Relate to Your Family Member with OCD View your relative's obsessive-compulsive behaviors as symptoms, not character flaws. Remember that your relative is a person with a disorder, but who is healthy and able in many other ways. Focus on the whole person. Do not allow OCD to take over family life. As much as possible, keep stress low and family life normal. Do not participate in your relative's rituals. If you have helped with rituals in the past, it may take time and practice to change this pattern. In order for people with OCD to make progress, family and friends must resist helping with ritual behaviors. Supporting the rituals, including reassurance rituals, hinders progress. Communicate positively, directly and clearly. State what you want to happen, rather than criticizing your relative for past behaviors. Avoiding personal criticism can help your relative feel accepted while he or she is making difficult changes. Mix humor with caring. Support doesn't always have to be serious. People with OCD know how absurd their fears are. They can often see the funny side of their symptoms, as long as the humor does not feel disrespectful. Family members say that humor can often help their relative become more detached from symptoms. What other problems are sometimes confused with OCD? Some disorders that closely resemble OCD and may respond to some of the same treatments are Trichotillomania (compulsive hair pulling), body dysmorphic disorder (imagined ugliness), and habit disorders, such as nail biting or skin picking. While they share superficial similarities, impulse control problems, such as substance abuse, pathological gambling, or compulsive sexual activity, are probably not related to OCD in any substantial way.

The most common conditions that resemble OCD are the tic disorders (Tourette's disorder and other motor and vocal tic disorders). Tics are involuntary motor behaviors (such as facial grimacing) or vocal behaviors (such as snorting) that often occur in response to a feeling of discomfort. More complex tics, like touching or tapping tics, may closely resemble compulsions. Tics and OCD occur together much more often when the OCD or tics begin during childhood. Depression and OCD often occur together in adults, and, less commonly, in children and adolescents. However, unless depression is also present, people with OCD are not generally sad or lacking in pleasure, and people who are depressed but do not have OCD rarely have the kinds of intrusive thoughts that are characteristic of OCD.
Although stress can make OCD worse, most people with OCD report that the symptoms can come and go on their own. OCD is easy to distinguish from a condition called posttraumatic stress disorder, because OCD is not caused by a terrible event.
Schizophrenia, delusional disorders, and other psychotic conditions are usually easy to distinguish from OCD. Unlike psychotic individuals, people with OCD continue to have a clear idea of what is real and what is not.
In children and adolescents, OCD may worsen or cause disruptive behaviors, exaggerate a pre-existing learning disorder, cause problems with attention and concentration, or interfere with learning at school. In many children with OCD, these disruptive behaviors are related to the OCD and will go away when the OCD is successfully treated.
Individuals with OCD may have substance-abuse problems, sometimes as a result of attempts to self-medicate. Specific treatment for the substance abuse is usually also needed
Children and adults with pervasive developmental disorders (autism, Asperger's Disorder) are extremely rigid and compulsive, with stereotyped behaviors that somewhat resemble very severe OCD. However, those with pervasive developmental disorders have extremely severe problems relating to and communicating with other people, which do not occur in OCD.
Only a small number of those with OCD have the collection of personality traits called Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder (OCPD). Despite its similar name, OCPD does not involve obsessions and compulsions, but rather is a personality pattern that involves a preoccupation with rules, schedules, and lists; perfectionism; an excessive devotion to work; rigidity; and inflexibility. However, when people have both OCPD and OCD, the successful treatment of the OCD often causes a favorable change in the person's personality.

John's story

John is a 42-year-old accountant whose obsessive "checking" behaviors are gradually taking up more and more of his time. He spends at least an hour every morning checking and rechecking that the windows are latched, the security alarm is set, and the front door is locked. At work, John goes over his clients' books again and again, out of fear that he's missed something or made a mathematical error. Consequently, his productivity has plummeted. Lately, John has also started to worry about his wife's safety, calling her every three hours to see if she's okay. He's afraid that if he misses a call, something bad will happen to her.