$20 Basic Registration Fee and $9 per test (except for language tests with listening, which cost $20 each) The College Board makes fee waivers available for low income students. Additional fees apply for late registration, standby testing, registration changes, scores by telephone, and extra score reports (beyond the four provided for free).
Candidates whose religious beliefs prevent them from taking the test on a Saturday may request to take the test on the following Sunday, except for the October test date in which the Sunday test date is eight days after the main test offering. Such requests must be made at the time of registration and are subject to denial. Students with verifiable disabilities, including physical and learning disabilities, are eligible to take the SAT with accommodations. The standard time increase for students requiring additional time due to learning disabilities is 50%.


The Three Types of SAT Questions
Each section of the SAT contains questions that can be divided into three categories: easy, medium, and difficult.
Easy SAT Questions
You will always find the easy SAT questions at the beginning of a test section. Easy SAT questions account for 1/3 of the questions included on the SAT test. Most test takers will get these questions right. But, don't let that lull you into a false sense of security. Read and answer the easy SAT questions quickly, but carefully.
Medium SAT Questions
SAT questions that are of medium difficulty also account for 1/3 of the questions on the SAT test and these questions always follow the collection of SAT easy questions. After answering all of the easy questions in each section, concentrate on the sets of medium SAT questions. Only half of the people taking the SAT will get the medium SAT questions right.
Difficult SAT Questions
Always try to answer the easy to medium SAT questions before attempting the difficult ones. Difficult SAT questions account for the final 1/3 of the questions on the SAT test. These SAT questions appear at the very end of each SAT test section and only very few test takers will be able to answer these questions successfully.



SAT Essay Do's and Don'ts
When taking the SAT, you will have 25 minutes to write an essay on an assigned topic. The content and quality of your SAT essay will determine your essay score.
Do's Do write neatly. Do pay close attention to grammar, punctuation, and spelling. Do stay on topic. An off-topic SAT essay will receive a zero score. Do make sure your argument is supported by genuine examples. Do write a well-organized SAT essay. Do start with an outline. You can develop your essay from there. Do plan your SAT essay before you start writing. Don'ts Don't write your SAT essay in your test book. You can make notes or write your outline in the book, but the answer grid must be used for the actual essay. Don't deviate too far from your outline. You spent time writing an outline for a reason. Don't write too large. There is only so much room allotted in your booklet for the SAT essay. Don't scribble out large portions of text on your SAT essay. Instead, erase the offending words as carefully as possible. The neater your SAT essay, the better. Don't use conjunctions, slang, or bad grammar in your SAT essay. Don't forget that the clock is running. You only have 25 minutes to complete the essay portion of the SAT test. Don't forget to proofread every sentence in your SAT essay. You don't want to be marked down for a simple mistake.


Calculator Tips
Calculators will not be available at the test center so, it's better to bring a calculator with you, even if you're not sure if you will use it. Use a calculator with which you are familiar and don't buy an expensive, sophisticated calculator just to take the test. Make sure your calculator is in good working order and that batteries are fresh. If your calculator fails during testing and you have no backup, you'll have to complete the test without it.
If you don't use a calculator regularly, practice using it on sample SAT mathematics questions before the test. All questions on the SAT Reasoning Test can be answered without a calculator.
Decide how to solve the problem in doing a scratch work in the test book before using the calculator. Don't try to use a calculator on every question. The calculator is meant to aid you in problem solving selected questions, not to get in the way.

Calculator Policy
Use of Calculators
Acceptable calculators are allowed for mathematics questions only. You will be dismissed and your scores canceled if you use your calculator to share information during the test or to remove test questions or answers from the test room.
SAT Reasoning Test™
Every question in the mathematics portion of the SAT Reasoning Test can be solved without a calculator. We recommend the use of a scientific or graphing calculator. You may not use a calculator while working on critical reading or writing portions and must put it away during these portions of the test.
SAT Subject Tests™
Some questions on the Mathematics Level 1 and Level 2 Subject Tests cannot be solved without a scientific or graphing calculator. We recommend the use of a graphing calculator rather than a scientific calculator. Calculators may only be used on the Mathematics Subject Tests. You may not use a calculator for other Subject Tests and must put it away when not taking a mathematics test.

Acceptable Calculators
Graphing calculators Scientific calculators Four-function calculators (not recommended) If you have a calculator with characters that are one inch or higher, or if your calculator has a raised display that might be visible to other test-takers, you will be seated at the discretion of the test supervisor.
You are not required to clear the memory on your calculator.
Unacceptable Calculators
Laptop or a portable/handheld computer Calculator that has QWERTY (typewriter-like) keypad, uses an electrical outlet, makes noise, or has a paper tape Electronic writing pad or pen-input/stylus-driven device Pocket organizer Cell phone calculator

