Legal custody is the right to make decisions about your child, including:
Education
Religion
Medical issues
Discipline

Having the child spend a significant amount of time with each parent; Spending weekdays with one parent and weekends with the other parent ; The child spending most of his or her time with one parent and visiting with the other parent on a regular schedule ; The parents moving in and out of a home where the children live (called "nesting").

. Child support is calculated from a formula. In order to determine the child support order, certain factors have to be known. For starters, it is imperative to know each parents gross weekly income. This, in and of itself can be tricky to determine, and is often the subject of litigation, because gross weekly income for tax purposes is not the same as gross weekly income for the purposes of calculating child support. For instance, people who are self-employed are not allowed to take certain deductions that are perfectly acceptable and legal with respect to the IRS. A parents gross weekly income takes all types of income into consideration (with only a few exceptions). After gross weekly income is determined, it is important to know information concerning either parents other children (prior born and subsequent), as well as costs of the children portion of healthcare insurance, the cost of work-related child care, and the number of overnights the children will spend with each parent.




There are specific child support guidelines that will determine how much child support should be paid in Indiana. Child support typically can't be waived by the parents, although a judge might decide this on a case-by-case basis, by looking at all factors. If you and your spouse agree to an amount of child support that's different than the guidelines would order, the judge will decide if that amount is in the child's best interests.

The court may order either parent or both parents to pay any amount reasonable for support of a child, without regard to marital misconduct, after considering all relevant factors, including:


(1) the financial resources of the custodial parent;


(2) the standard of living the child would have enjoyed if :

(A) the marriage had not been dissolved; or
(B) the separation had not been ordered;



(3) the physical or mental condition of the child and the child's educational needs; and


(4) the financial resources and needs of the noncustodial parent.



If necessary, a court can set aside a portion of joint or separate assets of the parties in a separate trust or fund for the support of the child.

An Indiana child support order can be modified if there has been:

- A substantial change in circumstances, or
- An order, issued at least 12 months previously, to pay child support that differs by more than 20% from the amount that would have been ordered by applying the child support guidelines

Examples of a substantial change in circumstances include:

- A change of custody from one parent to the other
- A big increase or decrease in either parent's income
- The child being several years older


In determining whether to award joint custody, the court will also consider:

The fitness and suitability of each parent Whether the parents are willing and able to communicate and cooperate in advancing the child's welfare The wishes of the child Whether the child has a close and beneficial relationship with both parents Whether the parents live in close proximity to each other and plan to continue to do so The nature of the physical and emotional environment in the home of each parent


After the custody order is signed by the judge and filed with the court clerk, both parents are bound by it. If a parent is denied court-ordered access to a child, he or she may bring the issue back before the court. The judge may decide to modify the visitation order, order makeup visitation for the time missed or order counseling or mediation.



Determination of Child Support Amount

1. Definition of Weekly Gross Income .

"Weekly gross income" is defined as actual weekly gross income of the parent if employed to full capacity, potential income if unemployed or underemployed and imputed income based upon "in-kind"benefits. Weekly gross income of each parent includes income from any source, except as excluded below, and includes, but is not limited to, income from salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, overtime, partnership distributions, dividends, severance pay, pensions, interest, trust income, annuities, capital gains, social security benefits, workmen's compensation benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, disability insurance benefits, gifts, prizes, and alimony or maintenance received from other marriages. 2. Self-Employment, Business Expenses, In-Kind Payments and Related Issues.

Weekly Gross Income from self-employment, operation of a business, rent, and royalties is defined as gross receipts minus ordinary and necessary expenses. In general, these types of income and expenses from self-employment or operation of a business should be carefully reviewed that the deductions be restricted to reasonable out-of-pocket expenditures necessary for the production of income. Weekly gross income from self-employment may differ from a determination of business income for tax purposes. Expense reimbursements or in-kind payments received by a parent in the course of employment, self-employment, or operation of a business should be counted as income if they are significant and reduce personal living expenses. Such payments might include a company car, free housing, or reimbursed meals. The self-employed shall be permitted to deduct that portion of their F.I.C.A. tax payment that exceeds the F.I.C.A. tax that would be paid by an employee earning the same Weekly Gross Income.

4. Natural and Adopted Children Living in the Household.

In determining a support order, there should be an adjustment to Weekly Gross Income of parents who have natural or legally adopted children living in their households that were born or adopted subsequent to the prior support order.




Indiana Laws on College Expenses and Health Care

Under Indiana laws, a court can award college expenses as part of a child support order:


1) amounts for the child's education in elementary and secondary schools and at institutions of higher learning, taking into account:


(A) the child's aptitude and ability;
(B) the child's reasonable ability to contribute to educational expenses through work, loans, and other sources of financial aid reasonably available to the child and each parent; and
(C) the ability of each parent to meet these expenses



2) Special medical, hospital, or dental expenses necessary to serve the best interests of the child.




In this case the child support continues during the incapacity or until further order of the court.

(B) has not attended a secondary or post secondary school for the prior 4 months and is not enrolled in a secondary or post secondary school; and
(C) is employed, or is capable of supporting himself or herself through employment.

The court may order that support be modified instead of terminated, if it finds that these conditions are met, but that the child is only partially supporting or is capable of only partially supporting himself or herself.

The court shall find the child emancipated and terminate the child support if the court finds that the child:
(1) has joined the United States armed services;
(2) has married; or
(3) is not under the care or control of either parent or an individual or agency approved by the court.


Why does the paying parent receive a credit for overnight visits with the child or children?

When the children are physically with the parent who pays child support, that paying parent has the responsibility to feed the children, to spend extra money on gas taking the children to/from school or extracurricular activities, to pay for additional utilities (presumably the expenses for water, electricity, etc are higher when the children are there). The credit received by the paying parent is intended to help offset those out-of-pocket expenses while the children are with him or her. How can I be sure child support is paid?

The best practice for everyone involved is to use an income withholding order (IWO). An IWO is an order that directs the paying parents employer to deduct the child support right from the parents paycheck. That money is then sent to the clerk of the court or the centralized collection bureau. By taking the money right out of the paycheck, the child support gets paid before all of the other bills and expenses, so the parent cant fall behind. , in fact, some Indiana courts actually require child support to be paid via IWO.


If an IWO is not possible (for example, if the paying parent is self-employed), it is still best to have all child support payments go through the clerk of courts/centralized collection bureau so that there is an accurate record of the payments made in the event there is ever a dispute between the parties.

Direct deposit from one party's bank account into the others are also common and useful tools in order to be sure the child support payments are timely made. What if a parent quits or loses his/her job?

If the parent quits a job in order to avoid paying child support, the court will most likely not change the support order, and will use coercive methods to nudge the parent into paying that can include ordering the parent to apply for jobs and provide proof of the application or monetary fines. If a parent is simply refusing to pay support and runs up a sizable arrearage, the court can order the parent jailed. The jail sentence usually provides for a certain length of time or the payment of a certain amount, whichever comes first.

A jail sentence quite often produces a hefty payment toward the support obligation. What if the paying parent leaves the state?

In cases where a parent leaves and tries to avoid paying support that way, the local prosecutor can ask the prosecuting attorney near the paying parent to begin a reciprocal enforcement action. In other words, the child support order follows the paying parent around. I hear about peoples tax refunds being taken because they owe child support. Does this really happen?

If a person has a sizable arrearage, the state can intercept tax refunds on behalf of the custodial parent.