In 1832 the first description of Lymphoma was published by Thomas Hodgkin. This was form of cancer was then named after him, it now is called Hodgkin's lymphoma. Over time, many other forms of lymphoma have been found and described which has led to a number of classifications being proposed. The 1982 Working formulation classification became very popular. It introduced the category non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), itself divided into 16 different diseases. However, since these different lymphomas have little in common with each other, the NHL label is of limited usefulness for doctors or patients and is slowly being abandoned. The latest classification by the World Health Organisation (2001) lists 43 different forms of lymphoma divided in four broad groups.


Some forms of lymphoma are indolent (e.g. small lymphocytic lymphoma), meaning that a long life can be lived even without the implementation of treatment. Whereas other forms of Lymphoma are aggressive (e.g. Burkitt's lymphoma) and cause extremely quick deterioration leading to death. Because of the wide variety of this disease the prognosis will depend on the correct classification, established by a pathologist after examination of a biopsy.



What is Lymphoma?
The lymph system is the body's other circulatory system, it circulates white blood cells and most importantly, lymphocytes. These are specialized cells involved in immune function found throughout the body. In normal healthy dogs, these cells are manufactured in the bone marrow, go through a life span of around 30 days, and then die off and are re-absorbed into the body or eliminated through the waste channels. In Lymphoma, the regulation of production is lost and these cells proliferate in large number, or they lose their programmed life cycle and continue to live on, overwhelming the other blood cells. High white blood cell count and swollen lymph glands are the characteristic signs of this disease, followed by lethargy, loss of appetite and leading eventually to death unless treated.

What Can be Done About Canine Lymphoma?
About 50% of dogs with lymphoma can be put into remission. Most lymphomas respond very well to modern therapy, by using a combination of chemotherapy (sometimes radiation, although not very often) and immunomodulation therapy such as K-9 Immunity or some equivalent immune system enhancers. In dogs which are otherwise healthy this type of cancer has one of the highest remission rates of any canine cancer.
Canine Lymphoma is usually treated with a special chemotherapy called the Madison Wisconsin Protocol. Some breeds of dog are more prone to this type of cancer than others. Golden Retrievers for instance seem to be especially susceptible to this type of canine cancer. Cancer is first and foremost an immune dysfunction disease. Lymphoma forms when the body fails to recognize the altered lymph cells as invaders. These are the cells that have multiplied improperly. In the last few years specialized compounds have become available for use in cancer patients to try and correct this error. These are called immune modulators. These immune modulator compounds often trigger the patient's "immune recognition response" allowing the body to recognize and destroy the aberrant cells. When this recognition response is triggered, the body re-learns how to deal with the tumor cells as it would with any other wound, and destroys those aberrant cells, producing healthy scar tissue in their place. Chemotherapy treatment works by effectively poisoning the body so as to destroy the cancer cells directly. This can be very useful in combating canine lymphoma cancer, in that they reduce the number of cancer cells present, but they do not address the underlying cause that allowed the cancer in the first place. Immune modulator compounds on the other hand are not toxic. They are a class of compounds which are naturally occurring in our foods and are required in all mammals for triggering a normal immune function. For some reason, in cancer patients large amounts of these immune modulators are required to trigger that normal rejection response, which in turn kills off the cancer cells. Effectively immune modulators activate the body's self healing process. This will not always work and these drugs are far from being an all out cancer cure.
Canine Lymphoma has been found to be treated effectively with a combination therapy of the two treatments. Chemotherapy should always be the first line of treatment for dog lymphoma along side surgery if necessary. Chemotherapy may not be viable depending on how extensively the cancer has spread as well as whether any major organs are involved. Chemotherapy and surgery are both effective in removing the bulk of the tumors, but should always be seen as only one arm of a multi-pronged approach. The underlying cause of the cancer will still be there, which is the immune dysfunction that allowed the tumor to form in the first place. Chemo and surgery do not deal with this underlying immune dysfunction. However, when chemo and surgery are used along with immune modulation therapy, the chances of a dog overcoming lymphoma and surviving a normal life span are excellent. Ultimately, it is only the patient's own immune system which can overcome the cancer. Using immune modulators is not a cure and certainly shouldn't be purchased out of faith and desperation. Your vets diagnosis will be your most accurate assessment of the treatments suitable for your dog. Suggest any possibilities you like to your vet and by all means get a second opinion, but under no circumstances should you go against your vets recommendations.
How well any dog will respond to therapy is difficult to generalize. Treatment success depends on many factors, such as the dog's age, his or her diet, their medical history, where the cancer is located and how extensive it is and what major systems are involved. Generally speaking, the earlier lymphoma is diagnosed, the better the outcome will be.



There are many different therapies used to fight canine cancer, depending upon the patient and the type of cancer. But one thing all dog cancers have in common is the need for a specialized diet.

It is thought by many experts that diet is one of the main reason for the high level of dogs developing cancer. If it is the diet that causes cancer in the first place, it seems pretty obvious that diet is an important part in treating a dog with cancer. In fact, diet is one of the most important factors in a successful treatment of many tumors. To give the dog the best possible chance of overcoming this challenge, the proper nutrients must be fed. Don't make the mistake of thinking just because a dog food is expensive, or because it is recommended by the vet or has a fancy name that it is necessarily the best food for your cancer patient.

Every process in the body is regulated and controlled by what goes in the mouth. If you want the best chance for a good outcome, you must give your dog the proper building blocks to use in fighting this disease, and keep out those things which will cause further harm.

When a dog is fighting cancer, the first concern is to get the immune function back to normal. One of the most important issues in this being accomplished is diet. A dog with cancer is building a lot of new tissue, and adequate proteins and cell membrane compounds (omega 3, 6 and 9 fatty acids) are required to do this. When the adequate amounts of the correct proteins and fats are not present in the diet, the body will rob it from other places, leading at best to muscle wasting, but more likely complications with the functions of the kidneys and liver. This can lead to kidney and liver failure, which is something your poor dog does not need on top of the cancer. Dogs will actually rarely die of the cancer itself. Instead it is more common for a dog to succumb to secondary symptoms such as liver or kidney failure. These side effects of cancer and they can usually be successfully treated or avoided by controlling the diet.


The first rule for feeding a dog with cancer is to stay away from grains.

We feed our dogs a diet that is based mostly around grain, even though no dogs would ever have the chance to feed on grains in the wild. They are primarily carnivores. When you feed a carnivore a diet based on grain, there is a chance that this will lead to the development of various immune dysfunctions, including cancer.

Most of our commercial dog foods are based upon rice, wheat or corn. But if we look at dogs in nature, we find they never graze in the wheat field or rice paddies. Dogs have evolved for the past 10 million years as primarily meat eaters.

Dogs have not evolved the necessary enzymes to digest or utilize grain in their diet.

While rice and corn may be a good filler for the dog food companies, they don't make a good filler for the dog. Read your dog food label: make sure the first ingredient on the list is some type of meat. You will almost always find some grains listed, but they should be down the list a ways, not right at the top. Sorghum is a better filler than corn, which is better than rice or wheat. For a canine cancer patient, any commercial dry food should be supplemented with additional animal protein sources. Feel free to add canned sardines (best), cottage cheese, eggs and just about any kind of meat such as hamburger or ground turkey. High fat content is good. Some vets advocate a raw diet, while some say it should be cooked. More important than cooked or raw is the amount of animal-based protein and fats. Keep in mind, dogs are primarily carnivores. They do best on the diet they evolved to eat.



Hemangiosarcoma

This cancer originates from the cells that form your dog's blood vessels and can occur in any part of your dog's body, but is mainly found in the spleen, liver, heart and skin. The first sign of the cancer being present is usually a ruptured tumor , and because the tumor is formed from blood vessel cells, it is often full of blood. If the tumor is in the liver or spleen, the ruptured tumor will cause anemia and weakness in your dog through the loss of blood .

If the tumor is present in your dog's skin, then a lump may be felt under the skin, and if it's in the bones then a swelling of the bone may be felt. Hemangiosarcomas usually occurs in older dogs, and some breeds seem to be predisposed to it - Golden Retrievers, German Shepherds, Portuguese Water Dogs and Skye Terriers.

The tumors aren't usually detected until their late stages, in internal organs this is usually when the tumor has ruptured, and the prognosis is poor; less than 50% of dogs will survive more than 6 months. Survival rates are better when the cancer occurs in the skin because it can usually be detected and treated earlier.

Osteosarcoma

This is cancer that originates in your dog's bones, more usually in the limbs but can occur in any part of the skeleton.

Large dog breeds are more prone to osteosarcoma - Great Danes, Saint Bernards, Great Pyrenees, Newfoundlands, Bernese Mountain Dogs, and Irish Wolfhounds in particular. Heavily built dogs such as Rottweilers, Labradors, Golden Retrievers, German Shepherds, Dobermans, Weimaraners, and Boxers are also at an increased risk.

The symptoms include lameness, pain in the bones, swelling, and reluctance to exercise. 90% of osteosarcomas spread to the lungs and so your dog may show symptoms such as coughing and difficulty in breathing too. Unfortunately the cancer is rarely detected before it has spread from the bones to other parts of the body. The prognosis is poor; less than 50% of dogs will survive more than a year.

Mammary Carcinoma

Mammary tumors are the most common tumor in female dogs that haven't been spayed - the risk of your dog developing this cancer is almost eliminated if she is spayed before her first season.

Provided the tumor is detected early enough, this cancer can usually be successfully treated. The symptoms are a solid mass or numerous swellings in the mammary glands; they tend to start off small and grow quickly grow in size.

As the cancer can spread to other parts of your dog's body, any unusual swelling in the mammary glands should be investigated by your vet as soon as possible so that any malignant tumor can be treated.

Mastocytomas (Mast Cell Tumors)

Mast cells form part of the body's tissue and play a role in the body's immune system. Mastocytomas are most commonly seen in the skin, and can spread to the lymph nodes, spleen, liver and bone marrow. These tumors usually occur in older dogs. Symptoms include raised masses on or under the skin - single or multiple lumps, which may be smooth, bumpy or ulcerated. Your dog may also show a lack of appetite, vomiting and abdominal pain.

The prognosis depends upon how far advanced the cancer is; broadly if the tumor is on your dog's limbs then he has a better prognosis than if the tumor is in the nail bed, genital areas and mouth. Mast cell tumors in the internal organs have a poor prognosis.


Here is a recap on types of treatment but this section will also look at deciding on which treatment to go for and if to treat at all. These are the treatments that are generally advised for each type of cancer. Followed by this list is some more information on each of the treatment types. This will allow you to get an idea of what will be involved in treatment, if sadly your dog develops cancer. Lymphoma - Chemotherapy Mast Cell Tumors - Chemotherapy, Surgery (+/- radiation) Fibrosarcomas - Surgical +/- chemotherapy, radiation Oral Cancers - Surgical, with reconstruction Mammary Tumors - Surgical (+/- chemotherapy follow-up) Osteosarcomas (bone) - Surgical + chemotherapy follow-up Hemangiosarcomas - Surgical + chemotherapy Skin Tumors - Surgical +/- chemotherapy, radiation Transitional Cell Carcinomas - Surgical + chemotherapy Undifferentiated SarcomasSurgical +/- chemotherapy, radiation

Surgery

Surgery can cure cancer by removing a tumor in its entirety from your dog's body. It's most successful where there is a solid tissue tumor that is localized (hasn't spread to other parts of the body) and which is small in size.

The aim of the surgery will be to remove the tumor entirely. Where this is not possible, because of the size or the there is a risk of damaging surrounding tissue, part of the tumor will be removed. Any part of the tumor left behind will be treated with another form of therapy such as radiation or chemotherapy.

Radiotherapy

With radiotherapy, a radioactive beam is focused on the tumor in order to damage/kill the malignant cells. The process aims to stop the tumor growing, and can offer good remission times for many tumors; radiotherapy cannot cure cancer. Radiotherapy may be used in a number of situations: after surgery where cancer cells remain with the aim of preventing the tumor from growing in size; before surgery or chemotherapy to try and reduce the tumor size before treatment; and where a cure is not possible, as palliative therapy to reduce the symptoms of cancer for as long as possible.

Radiotherapy is usually given as a series of treatments, rather than as one large dose because the radiation kills normal as well as cancerous cells. Your dog will require anesthesia for each dose of radiation in order to keep him still during the treatment.

Your dog may suffer radiation dermatitis as a side effect of radiotherapy. This is a reddening of the skin which may progress to a what looks like severe sunburn or a blistering rash on his skin. This will clear up, but it's important that your dog does not scratch the area as this could lead to it becoming infected. Another side effect is hair loss; the hair will grow back but sometimes the color will be different to what it was originally.

Chemotherapy

Chemotherapy is the use of drugs to control tumor growth, and will be a suggested treatment where the cancer is in more than one part of your dog's body and is likely to spread, or has spread, through his body.

The drugs administered are the same as those used for treating human cancer, but tend to show fewer side effects in dogs than humans. The reasons for this are that the drugs are administered in smaller doses and are used singularly or in fewer combinations than treatments for human cancer. There is also some evidence that they have less side effects when administered to dogs.

Your dog's intestinal tract, bone marrow and hair follicles are particularly sensitive to chemotherapy treatment. As a result, common side effects are loss of appetite, nausea and diarrhea, decrease in immunity and loss of hair respectively. Unlike humans, your dog's hair will usually grow back after chemotherapy treatment.

Chemotherapy can be administered orally, by injection or by slow infusion. Treatment intervals vary from weekly to three weekly, and your dog will require blood tests between treatments to confirm the effectiveness of the treatment. How long your dog needs to be treated will vary - it may be for the rest of his life, a for few weeks or months. In the majority of cases chemotherapy will not fully cure cancer, but it can slow down the progression of the disease which will lengthen and improve the quality of your dogs life.

Hormonal Therapy

Certain cancer, such as mammary cancer, can be treated via hormone therapy. By preventing the cancer cells receiving the hormones they need to grow and multiply, the cancer can be controlled.

Immunotherapy

There is a belief that some cancers grow due to a defect in the body's immune system, and had the defect not been there, then the tumor's growth would have been suppressed. The immunotherapy treatment works by boosting the body's immune system to fight off the cancer. Immunotherapy is an emerging treatment for cancer, and there is currently a great deal of research being undertaken into how it works and it's effectiveness in fighting the disease.

When deciding on a treatment plan some of the things to consider are: do you have the time and financial commitment to see your dog through intensive treatment; what would be the prognosis for your dog with each type of treatment; what are the possible side effects of the treatment, and can you deal with them; what is an acceptable quality of life for your dog, and could the treatments proposed give him this. how much pain and discomfort is your dog currently suffering and will the proposed treatments improve this?

These are tough questions to ask, and the answers may not be want you want to hear. Take the time to discuss all your concerns and questions with your vet as well as your dog's oncologist, friends and family, and support group. Low intervention and extending your dog's life by a number of weeks may be the best life you can offer your dog rather rounds of surgery, radiation and drug treatments in exchange for a few extra months of life. Only you can make the decision, and whatever decision you do make, trust yourself that it is the right one for your dog.



Cancer is a devastating disease and it's truly heartbreaking when it affects your beloved canine companion. As a pet owner, educating yourself about dog cancer can help you to catch the disease in its earlier stages and to provide your sick pet with the best care possible. Cancer occurs in dogs in a multitude of different forms, from liver cancer and kidney cancer to skin cancer and leukemia. With so many different types of canine cancer, it's impossible to produce a single list of symptoms to check for when on the lookout for cancer. Rather, each type of cancer has a separate collection of symptoms and warning signs that may arise when a dog is affected by a certain strain of the disease. While certain symptoms are common between several types of cancer, such as weight loss and loss of appetite, other signs are more unique to specific forms. All you can do is to pay close attention to your dogs well being. If you notice any symptoms mentioned, or your just generally worried about your dog then get them to the vet straight away. Remember the earlier you catch the cancer the better the chances of survival. Finally if you and your dog are going through the battle against cancer all I can do is to wish you the very best of luck, our hearts go out to you.