If you're looking for a tranquil place to stay to get away from it all, Fickle Creek Farm is well worth a visit. The small and intimate bed and breakfast is truly unique and the farm is run with a focus on ethics and natural farming. You'll be treated to a delicious breakfast made from farm fresh produce. There's no better way to start the day. If you love the outdoors then you'll love Fickle Creek Farm and the surround area. There's plenty to see and do. If you live closer by then you can pop in and buy eggs, arrange a visit to the farm, or taste the Fickle Creek Farm produce at a nearby restaurant. The produce is also sold at farmers markets in the area.



Fickle Creek Farm has the minimum impact on the environment. It is a sustainable venture that truly cares about the welfare of the animals.
There are Steers, sheep, pigs and goats on the farm. They are all raised on pasture land. They are not given hormones, medicated feed, or grain finishing.
The pigs are free to sit under the shady trees in summer and have shelters for when it rains or snows. All the animal food is bought locally from an Efland feed mill. The chickens are not given antibiotics, hormones, or animal by-products and they produce eggs year round that you can buy fresh from the farm.

A system of r otational grazing is in place for all of the animals. They are often moved to clean and nutritious new areas off the farm.

Around once a month a selection of the animals raised on the pasture land are sent to a local USDA-inspected facility to be slaughtered. From the pigs you can have chops, ribs, ground pork, hot or mild sausages, roast, sliced or steak ham, Boston roasts, tenderloin, loin roasts, slab bacon and fat back.
Fruit and vegetables are are also grown at Fickle Creek Farm. They are all grown naturally with no inorganic chemicals added to the soil. All this great food is sold through the Farmers Markets in Durham and Hillsborough or can be bought straight from the farm and elsewhere. You can arrange a visit to the farm by phone or email The Fickle Creek also has a Bed and Breakfast experience which is so much more than a bed for the night. Stay a night at Fickle Creek and it could change your entire outlook on life. You do need to book in advance for this

. Guests can enjoy a delcious breakfast of seasonal fruits, vegetables, cheeses, eggs, & meats, fresh from the farm.
The Garden View room features a full kitchen, a private bathroom with shower, and a spacious deck, perfect for a relaxing retreat. This room is complete with a Queen sized bed, a pull out futon, and it has it's own private entrance. A stay in the Garden View room costs $120 per night for a one night stay, $100 per night for a two night stay, and $95 per night for a stay of 3-7 nights. For longer stays of over seven nights, the price is just $90 per night. If you don't want breakfast included then you can also have a discount on the room rate.

You could alternatively stay in The Quilt Room which has it's own private bathroom and is situated within the main house. The room has a Queen sized bed and you'll have access to a shared living room with a screened porch and deck area. A stay in the Quilt Room costs $100 per night for a one night stay, $90 per night for a two night stay, and $85 per night for a stay of 3-7 nights. For longer stays of over seven nights, the price is just $80 per night.

These rates are for single or double room occupancy, but you can add extra guests at cost of $15 each for anyone over the age of two years. Pets are welcome in the Garden View room at an additional cost of $10 per pet per night. Fickle Creek Farm B&B also welcomes speakers of Spanish, French, Hebrew, ASL, & kiLuba.


The environmentally friendly practices that go into the running of Fickle Creek Farm are many. Nutrient cycling is very important to the welfare of the farm. As no artificial chemicals are added, nutrient cycling is very useful to avoid the loss of nutrients into surface and ground water, minimizing the needs for soil additives.
Via Agroforestry, b iodiversity and natural ecosystem processes are conserved . The trees on the farm add to the natural beauty, give shade for the animals and there are also trees that are great for honey production. The trees also help prevent erosion, and minimize the need to heat or cool the farm and so reduce the use of electricity. Electricity as well as water conservation is a key concern of Fickle Creek Farm. The farm focuses on the native plants in the surrounding areas, paying attention to protecting those plants and animals that were here before the farm. Keeping the balanced eco-system is important at the far.
All of the vehicles on the farm run on 100% Biodiesel that is made just 35 miles away . Biodiesel is both renewable and non-polluting.
Fickle Creek Farm strives to support the local economy and the local community so they sell their products as close to the farm as they can. All the animals on the farm were born within a thirty mile radius of the farm, and nothing is sold further than twenty five miles away.


Fickle Creek Farm are proud to be part of the Durham Farmers Market Collaborative CSA (Community Supported Agriculture). If you subscribe to the service you can receive items from Fickle Creek Farm, along with produce from other local Farms. Pine Knot Farm and Chapel Hill Creamery. A subscription to either the Meat package or the Eggs and Cheese package, will bring you delicious fresh local goodies from Fickle Creek Farm. With the Meat package, every week subscribers will receive one of several kinds of meat. This could be a whole chicken, chicken breasts, beef, lamb, or pork. all sourced from Fickle Creek Farm. With a subscription to the Eggs and Cheese package you willr receive e ggs and cheese weekly on a rotation. The eggs are from Fickle Creek Farm and the cheese is from Chapel Hill Creamery.
As well as your edible goodies, with a subscription you will also get a recipe booklet with recipes and preparation and storage instructions, a weekly meal planner with more suggested recipes, and you'll also be given the opportunity to v isit to participating farms by prearrangement either to observe or to help out.
You can sign up for packages on the Durham Farmers Market Collaborative CSA website, and there are discounts for anyone signing up for more than one package too.




Fickle Creek Farm are happy to arrange customized tours of the farm for you that focus on what is important to you and your group. Tours must be arranged in advance and cost $5 per person for a minimum of ten visitors. The tour lasts around an hour.

Members of the public and other farmers often have a chance to see Fickle Creek through the various tours offered. The Piedmont Farm Tour is organised annually by The Carolina Farm Stewardship Association and covers more than thirty farms, including Fickle Creek Farm, in Orange, Chatham, Alamance, & Caswell Counties.This is usually held on the third weekend in April. Tourgroups of children are welcome. Recent young visitors have included the Spanish is Fun Academy from Chapel Hill, Sunflower School from Hillsborough, C'est si Bon Cooking School from Chapel Hiland Exploris Charter School from Raleigh. University and College groups are also given a warm welcome at Fickle Creek Farm. Classes that have come to Fickle Creek to learn more about the practices used include NCSU School of Veterinary Science (Poultry Science), NCSU College of Natural Resources (Agroforestry), CCCC (Central Carolina Community College, Continuing Education in Whole Farm Planning), CCCC (Animal Science).


To find Fickle Creek Farm you should follow these directions: If you're travelling from the west via Interstate 40 east / 85 north, t ake exit 157 - Buckhorn Road. Then turn right at the top of the exit ramp heading south on Buckhorn Road. Drive 4.5 miles and look for black mailbox 4122 on the right. Opposite this mailbox turn left into a gravel drive. and bear left at the first fork. Then bear right at second fork.

If you're travelling fromthe east via Interstate 40 west / 85 south, take exit 160 - Efland. Then turn left at the bottom of the exit ramp headingsouth on Mt Willing Road. Drive 3.8 miles then turn left at the stop sign onto Buckhorn Road. Drive another 1.7 miles and look for black mailbox 4122 on the right. Opposite this mailbox turn left into a gravel drive. and bear left at the first fork. Then bear right at second fork.

Or if you're taking the Scenic Route From Carrboro & Chapel Hill, then get to Calvander at the intersection of Old 86 / Homestead Road / Hillsborough Rd / Dairyland Road. Go west on Dairyland Road for 6.8 miles. You'll then see Mapleview Farm Ice Cream store on the right at the intersection of Dairyland & Rocky Ridge Rd. At the end of Dairyland Road, turn right onto Orange Grove Rd and drive 0.2 miles. Turn left onto Buckhorn Road opposite the fire station and drive 2.9 miles on Buckhorn Road. On the left look for mailbox 4122. Opposite this mailbox turn left into a gravel drive. and bear left at the first fork. Then bear right at second fork.

When you are on the farm road drive slowly until you reach the farm buildings.



Whether you stay for a day, a week or simply visit the farm for a tour and to buy some fresh eggs, you'll have a great time. You'll see how well the animals are looked after, and the setting is so peaceful and relaxing, you'll definitely leave in good spirits.