The Republic of South Africa is a country located at the southern tip of the African continent. It borders Namibia , Botswana , Zimbabwe, Mozambique , while a fifth country, Lesotho , is an enclave entirely surrounded by South African territory. Likewise, Swaziland is a land-locked enclave bordered by South Africa except on the Eastern side which abuts with Mozambique.
South Africa has experienced a completely and significantly different evolution from other nations in Africa as a result of two main facts. Firstly, the strategic importance of the Cape Sea Route, as emphasised by the closure of the Suez Canal during the Six Day War, and mineralogical wealth made the country extremely important to Western interests, particularly during the Cold War. Secondly, immigration from Europe reached levels not experienced in other African communities. As a result of the former, South Africa is a very racially diverse nation. It has the largest population of people of 'coloured' (mixed race) communities in Africa. Black South Africans, comprising several tribal groupings account for slightly less than 80% of the population. Racial strife, mainly between (but not confined to) the white minority and the black majority has played a large part in the country's history and politics, culminating in apartheid , an official policy of 'separate development', which was instituted in 1948 by the ruling National Party, a political party set up for whites only. Segregation did however exist prior to 1948. The laws that defined apartheid began to be repealed or abolished by the National Party in 1990 after a long and sometimes violent struggle (including economic sanctions from the international community) by the black majority as well as many white, coloured, and Indian South Africans. South Africa is one of the few in Africa never to have had a coup d' tat, and regular elections have been held for almost a century; however, the vast majority of black South Africans were not enfranchised until 1994. The economy of South Africa is the largest and best developed on the continent, with modern infrastructure common throughout the country. South Africa is often referred to as The Rainbow Nation - a term coined by Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu, and later adopted by then-President Nelson Mandela as a metaphor to describe the country's newly-developing multicultural diversity in the wake of segregationist apartheid ideology. South Africa successfully hosted the 2010 FIFA World Cup in June and July that year. It was the first time the tournament was held on the African Continent. HISTORY The South African region contains some of the oldest archaeological sites in Africa. Extensive fossil remains at the Sterkfontein , Kromdraai and Makapansgat caves suggest that various australopithecines existed in South Africa from about three million years ago. These were succeeded by various species of Homo , including Homo habilis , Homo erectus and modern man, Homo sapiens . Bantu -speaking peoples (the term Bantu is a linguistic term not an ethnic one), iron-using agriculturists and herdsmen, moved south of the Limpopo River into modern-day South Africa by the 4th or 5th century AD (the Bantu expansion ) displacing the original Khoi and San speakers. They slowly migrated south and the earliest ironworks in modern-day KwaZulu-Natal Province are believed to date from around 1050. The southernmost group was the Xhosa people, whose language incorporates certain linguistic traits from the earlier Khoi and San people, reaching the Fish River , in today's Eastern Cape Province . These Iron Age populations displaced earlier hunter-gatherer peoples as they migrated. Of course, dates are estimates only as there is no significant firm proof of when the migrating groups actually arrived in a particular area.
The written history of South Africa begins with the accounts of Portuguese navigators passing South Africa on their way to the East Indies trade routes. Subsequent to the first circumnavigation of the Cape in 1488 by the Portuguese Explorer Bartolomeu Dias a number of significant shipwrecks occurred along the Southern African coast. According to early ships records from the early navigators, the accounts of shipwreck survivors provide the earliest written accounts of Southern Africa. In the two centuries following 1488 a number of small fishing settlements were made along the coast by Portuguese sailors, but no written account of these settlements survives. In 1652 a victualling station was established at the Cape of Good Hope by Hollander Jan van Riebeeck on behalf of the Dutch East India Company . For most of the 17th and 18th centuries, the slowly expanding settlement was a Dutch possession. The Dutch settlers eventually met the southwesterly expanding Xhosa people in the region of the Fish River, located in the area today known as the Eastern Cape . A series of wars, called Cape Frontier Wars , ensued, mainly caused by conflicting land and livestock interests.The area also teemed with wild animals of just about every species.
To ease Cape labour shortages slaves were brought from Indonesia, Madagascar , and India. What added to the excitement was certain troublesome leaders, often of royal descent, who were banished from Dutch colonies to South Africa. This group of slaves eventually gave rise to a population that now identifies themselves as " Cape Malays ". Cape Malays have traditionally been accorded a higher social status by the European colonists - many became wealthy landowners, but also became increasingly dispossessed as Apartheid developed. Cape Malay mosques in District Six were spared, and today serve as monuments for the destruction that occurred around them. Many too are sacred shrines to high-ranking devotees of the Muslim faith.


Further intermingling within the Cape Coloured population itself, as well as with Xhosa and other South African people, now means that they constitute roughly 50% of the population in the Western Cape Province . Most of the descendants of these slaves, who often married with Dutch settlers, were later classified together with the remnants of the Khoikhoi as Cape Coloureds . Great Britain seized the Cape of Good Hope area in 1797 during the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War . The Dutch East India Company declared bankruptcy, and the British annexed the Cape Colony in 1805. The British continued the frontier wars against the AmaXhosa, pushing the eastern frontier eastward through a line of forts established along the Fish River and consolidating it by encouraging British settlement . Due to pressure of abolitionist societies in Britain, the British parliament first stopped its global slave trade in 1806, then abolished slavery in all its colonies in 1833. Diamonds were discovered in 1867 and then gold in 1886, and this encouraged economic growth and immigration, intensifying the subjugation of the natives. The Boers successfully resisted British encroachments during the First Boer War (1880-1881) using tactics much better suited to local conditions. For example, the Boers wore khaki clothing, which was the same colour as the earth, whereas the British wore bright red uniforms, making them easy targets for Boer sharpshooters . The British returned in greater numbers without their red jackets in the Second Boer War (1899-1902), which was largely opposed by the Liberal Party in the British Parliament . The Boers' attempt to ally themselves with German South West Africa provided the British the excuse they needed to take control of the Boer Republics. The Boers resisted fiercely, but the British eventually overwhelmed the Boer forces, using their superior numbers and external supply chains and concentration camps as well as the controversial scorched earth tactic. The Treaty of Vereeniging specified full British sovereignty over the South African republics, and the British government agreed to assume the 3,000,000 war debt owed by the Afrikaner governments. One of the main provisions of the treaty ending the war was that 'Blacks' would not be allowed to vote, except in the Cape Colony. Winston Churchill was a reporter covering the Boer War when he was arrested and incarcerated as a spy for the British Government.
After four years of negotiations, the Union of South Africa was created from the Cape and Natal colonies, as well as the republics of Orange Free State and Transvaal , on May 31 , 1910 , exactly eight years after the end of the Second Boer War. The newly-created Union of South Africa was a dominion. In 1934 the South African Party and National Party merged to form the United Party , seeking reconciliation between Afrikaners and English-speaking 'Whites', but split in 1939 over the Union's entry into World War II as an ally of the United Kingdom. The right-wing National Party sympathised with Nazi Germany during the war, and sought greater racial segregation, or apartheid, after it. When World War II ended, the National Party was "elected" (only Whites were permitted to vote) to power in 1948, and began implementing a series of harsh segregationist laws that would become known collectively as apartheid . Not surprisingly, this segregation also applied to the wealth acquired during rapid industrialization of the 1950s, '60s, and '70s. While the White minority enjoyed the highest standard of living in all of Africa, often comparable to " First World " western nations, the Black majority remained disadvantaged by almost every standard, including income, education, housing, and life expectancy. However, the average income and life expectancy of a black, 'Indian' or 'coloured' South African compared favorably to many other African states, such as Ghana and Tanzania. In these countries, life expectancy was short through poverty and disease.
Internationally, apartheid became increasingly controversial, leading to widespread sanctions and divestment abroad and growing unrest and oppression within South Africa. (See also special section on History of South Africa in the apartheid era .) A long period of harsh suppression by the government, and resistance, strikes , marches, protests, and sabotage, by various anti-apartheid movements, most notably the African National Congress (ANC), followed. In 1987 the South African Defence Forces entered Angola in a bid to help the UNITA forces, but in Battle of Cuito Cuanavale South Africa and UNITA are defeated by Cuba and Angola. A few months later, 1988, Cuba defeated the SADF again in Calueque , wining the Bush War , so called Border War or Angola War . Then South Africa called for peace and accepted several conditions previously rejected outright. In 1989 elections are summoned in Namibia (old South West Africa) with every political party, including the South West Africa Perople's Organisation - SWAPO . In 1990 Namibia achieves is independence from South Africa. In 1990 the ruling National Party government took the first step towards negotiating a political settlement, when it lifted the ban on the African National Congress and other left-wing political organisations, and released Nelson Mandela from prison after 27 years. Apartheid legislation was gradually removed from the statute books, and the first multi-racial elections were held in 1994. The ANC won by an overwhelming majority, and has been in power ever since. Despite the end of apartheid, millions of South Africans, mostly black, continue to live in poverty . While this is attributed to the legacy of the apartheid regime, increasingly, what many see as the failure of the current government to tackle social issues is regarded as the cause of hardship. This, coupled with the monetary and fiscal discipline of the current government to ensure both redistribution of wealth and economic growth sees many areas of South Africa afflicted by poverty . However, the ANC's social housing policy has produced some improvement in living conditions in many areas by redirecting fiscal spending and improving the efficiency of the tax collection system. Unfortunately, bribery and corruption are rampant within the ruling party and this has not been well received by many. The result is increasing civil disobedience in the form of riots and road blocks aimed at poor service delivery.
POLITICS South Africa has a bicameral Parliament : the National Council of Provinces (or upper house) with 90 members, and a National Assembly (or lower house) with 400 members. Members of the lower house are elected on a population basis by proportional representation : half of the members are elected from national lists and half are elected from provincial lists. Ten members are elected to represent each province in the National Council of Provinces, regardless of the population of the province. Elections for both chambers are held every five years. The government is formed in the lower house, and the leader of the majority party in the National Assembly is the President . Current South African politics is dominated by the African National Congress (ANC), which received 69.7% of the vote during the last 2004 general election and 66.3% of the vote in the 2006 municipal election . The main challenger to the ANC's rule is the Democratic Alliance party, which received 12.4% of the vote in the 2004 election and 14.8% in the 2006 election. The leader of this party is Tony Leon . The formerly dominant New National Party , which introduced apartheid through its predecessor, the National Party , has suffered increasing humiliation at election polls since 1994, and finally voted to disband. It chose to merge with the ANC on 9 April 2005 . Other major political parties represented in Parliament are the Inkatha Freedom Party , which mainly represents Zulu voters, and the Independent Democrats , who took 6.97% and 1.7% of the vote respectively in the 2004 election. An ANC breakaway party called COPE emerged just before the last general election, but has yet to prove itself at the polls.
With the demise of apartheid in 1994, the South African government had to integrate the formerly independent and semi-independent Bantustans into the political structure of South Africa. To this end, it abolished the four former provinces of South Africa ( Cape Province , Natal , Orange Free State , and Transvaal ) and replaced them with nine fully integrated provinces. The new provinces are usually much smaller than the former provinces, which theoretically encourages local governments to provide more resources over smaller areas. The nine provinces are further sub-divided into 52 districts , six of which are metropolitan and 46 district municipalities . The 46 district municipalities are further subdivided into 231 local municipalities . The district municipalities also contain 20 district management areas (mostly game parks) which are directly governed by the district municipalities. The six metropolitan municipalities perform the functions of both district and local municipalities. GEOGRAPHY As the name suggests, South Africa is located at southern end of Africa and embraces east,south and western coastlines. The total seaboard stretches more than 2,500 kilometres (1,550 mi) and includes two oceans (the Atlantic and the Indian). At 470,979 mi (1,219,912 km ), South Africa is the world's 25th-largest country (after Mali ). It is comparable in size to Colombia, and is nearly twice the size of the US state of Texas. South Africa has a great variety of climate zones, from the extreme desert of the Kalahari near Namibia to lush subtropical climate along the border with Mozambique . It rises from the Eastern Coastal plains, over the Drakensberg Mountain range towards the interior plateau known as the Highveld . Even though South Africa is classified as semi-arid , there is considerable variation in climate as well as topography . The interior of South Africa is a giant, mountainous, and sparsely populated scrubland plateau known as the Karoo, which becomes drier towards the northwest along the Kalahari desert. In contrast, the eastern coastline is lush and well-watered, which produces a climate similar to the tropics. The extreme southwest (including the Cape Peninsula) has a climate remarkably similar to that of the Mediterranean with wet winters and hot, dry summers. This area also produces much of South Africa's wine and is noted for prevailing winds, which blow intermittently almost all year. Strong South Easterly winds occur in the summer months, while the rain-bearing North Westerly takes over during winter.The severity of this wind made passing around the Cape of Good Hope particularly treacherous for sailors, causing many shipwrecks . Further east on the country's south coast, rainfall is distributed more evenly throughout the year, producing a green landscape. This area is popularly known as the Garden Route . The Free State is particularly flat due to the fact that the eastern region of the Highveld does not extend as far north as the western region. North of the Vaal River , the Highveld becomes better watered and does not experience subtropical extremes of heat. Johannesburg , in the centre of the Highveld, is at 1,740 metres (5,709 ft ) and receives an annual rainfall of 760 millimetres (30 in). Winters in this region are cold, although snow is rare, frost is common. Sub-zero temperatures at night are the rule rather than the exception.
To the north and east of Johannesburg, the altitude drops beyond the Highveld's escarpment, and turns into the Lowveld . The Lowveld has particularly high temperatures, and is also the location of traditional South African Bushveld . The high Drakensberg mountains , which form the eastern escarpment of the Highveld, offer limited skiing opportunities in winter. Many people think that the coldest place in South Africa is Sutherland in the western Roggeveld Mountains , where midwinter temperatures can reach as low as -15 degrees Celsius (5 F ). In fact, the coldest place is actually Buffelsfontein, which is in the Molteno district of the Eastern Cape. Buffelsfontein recorded a low of -18.6 degrees Celsius. The deep interior has the hottest temperatures: A temperature of 51.7 C (125 F) was recorded in 1948 in the Northern Cape Kalahari near Upington on the Orange River. South Africa also has one possession, the small sub-antarctic archipelago of the Prince Edward Islands , consisting of Marion Island (290 km /112 mi ) and Prince Edward Island (45 km /17.3 mi ) (not to be confused with the Canadian province of the same name). Finally, geographically speaking, South Africa has a presence in the form of a permanent base on the Antartic.
There are over 20,000 different plants species in South Africa , or about 10% of all the known species of plants on Earth, making it particularly rich in plant biodiversity. South Africa's most prevalent biome is grassland , particularly on the Highveld , where the plant cover is dominated by different grasses , low shrubs , and acacia trees , mainly camel-thorn and whitethorn. Vegetation becomes even more sparse towards the northwest due to low rainfall . There are several species of water-storing succulents like aloes and euphorbias in the very hot and dry Namaqualand area. The grass and thorn savannah turns slowly into a bush savannah towards the northeast of the country, with more dense growth. There are significant numbers of baobab trees in this area, near the northern end of Kruger National Park. One of the six floral kingdoms, the Fynbos Biom is contained in a relatively small region of the Western Cape. M ore than 9,000 of those Fynbos make this among the richest regions on earth in terms of floral biodiversity. The majority of the plants are evergreen hard-leaf plants with fine, needle-like leaves , such as the sclerophyllous plants. Another uniquely South African plant is the protea genus of flowering plants. There are around 130 different species of protea in South Africa. Perlagoniums originate in South Africa and have in turn been used for propogating the Geranium family world-wide.
While South Africa has a great wealth of flowering plants, it has few forests . Only 1% of South Africa is forest, almost exclusively in the humid Eastern coastal plain along the Indian Ocean in KwaZulu-Natal . There are even smaller reserves of forests that are out of the reach of fire, known as montane forests. Plantations of imported tree species are predominant, particularly the non-native eucalyptus and pine . South Africa has lost extensive acreage of natural habitat in the last four decades, primarily due to overpopulation and sprawling development patterns. The area is one of the worst affected places in the world with regard to invasion by alien species. Many e.g. Black Wattle, Port Jackson, Hakea , Lantana and Jacaranda pose a significant threat to the native biodiversity and the already scarce water resources. The original temperate forest that met the first European settlers to South Africa was exploited ruthlessly until only small patches remained. Currently, South African hardwood trees like Real Yellowwood (Podocarpus latifolius) , stinkwood (Ocotea bullata) , and South African Black Ironwood (Olea laurifolia) are under government protection. Ancient-looking Cycads are also protected and may not be traded without a permit.
Numerous mammals are found in the bushveld habitats including lion , leopard , White Rhino , Blue Wildebeest , kudu , impala and giraffe . There is a significant extent of the bushveld habitat in the northeast including Kruger National Park and the Mala Mala Reserve, as well as in the far north in the Waterberg Biosphere . CAN SOUTH AFRICA BE ALL THINGS TO ALL PEOPLE?

A lot has happened in the 18 year post-apartheid era, much of it good. Consider for example, that South Africa was a country with nuclear weapons, whereas now it is the shining example of a democratic land with rights and freedom for one and all. The truth of the matter is that in reality, the lives of the vast majority of citizens have remained unchanged, in fact may even have deteriorated in many ways.

HIV/AIDS has taken a heavy toll and there is no cure in sight as yet. Poverty is this scourge's "best friend" and so the disease spreads with impunity as those that have it, take the stance, "live for today" while they sleep with multiple partners. "Scary" is a very apt description of the situation, but what can you do when the present State President has four current wives and has been married six times? What sort of message is that sending out?

To the good, everyone wants to deal with South Africa, or so it seems. However, with the currency (Rand) closely linked to events in Europe - SA's major trading partners - the country has been dragged into recession and is paying a high price compared to it's first-world trading partners. Beware of the well-intended, namely: China. China has identified South Africa as arich potential trading partner in terms of supplying raw materials. Many finished goods, such as clothing for example are exported to South Africa at a tenth of the cost of manufacturing the same item locally in SA.

South Africa has elected to go the Trade Union route, which means entrenched rights for the workers and decent salaries and wages too. This is extremely dangerous in a developing third-world country! It simply cannot afford the sophisticated labour systems found in countries such as Australia and elsewhere. Employers are loathe to take on more workers when they are told how much to pay, and how not to treat their employees.
CRIME According to a survey for the period 1998 2000 compiled by the United Nations, South Africa was ranked second for murder and first for assaults and rapes per capita. Total crime per capita is 10th out of the 60 countries in the data set. Crime has had a pronounced effect on society: many middle-class South Africans moved into gated communities, abandoning the central business districts of some cities for the relative security of suburbs. This effect is most pronounced in Johannesburg, although the trend is noticeable in other cities as well. Many emigrants from South Africa also state that crime was a big motivator for them to leave. Crime against the farming community has continued to be a major problem.

Skills migration Along with many African nations, South Africa has been experiencing a "brain drain" since well before the first open elections in 1994. This is believed to be potentially damaging for the regional economy, and is almost certainly detrimental for the well-being of the majority of people reliant on the healthcare infrastructure, given the HIV/AIDS epidemic. The skills drain in South Africa tends to demonstrate racial contours (naturally given the skills distribution legacy of South Africa) and has thus resulted in large numbers of the white South African emigrating abroad .


THE GOOD NEWS

Many free-trading economies are keen to work through South Africa on a joint development basis. They regard this country as a gateway to Africa in general, because of its impressive infrastructure. If things pan out, this could lead to massive job creation and improved wealth and health for the 49-million inhabitants of the Rainbow Nation.

Continental development in Africa would also have the affect of keeping people where they belong. Informal migration from the north to the south of the African Continent is putting enormous strain on the South African economy. Just take the health system for example. Financial budgets are approved and often spent on caring for citizens of other countries living illegally in South Africa. This needs to be addressed for the good of all.

PROSPECTS FOR CHILDREN IN THE NEW SOUTH AFRICA

While it is true to say that education has been made available to all children (and even many adults) in South Africa, the standard is proving to be well-below acceptable levels. Further, transport to and from places of learning in rural areas is virtually non existant, forcing thousand's of learners (as scholars are referred to) to walk several kilometers a day. Extreme weather conditions make this an even more unpleasant event for those who make the daily trek. Matriculation pass rates have been falling alarmingly over the last several years and the curriculum has been doubted by many acknowledged experts. The most frightening statistic though, is the unemployment rate affecting those about to leave school. Officially set at 25%, it is closer to 80% in remote areas.

FUN IN THE SUN FOR CHILDREN

The climate make for a great outdoor lifestyle in South Africa, and there is plenty for the children to enjoy too. From some of the most pristine coastline anywhere in the world, to spectacular mountain ranges. White-water rafting is available on the Orange River as well as many others in the rain season. There is even the prospect of skiing in so areas when the winter snows arrive - yes, snow does fall in Africa!

The great outdoors affords much more besides. Sport is popular with children with football, rugby, cricket and athletics taking advantage of the fine climate. There are some fabulous tourisim destinations for the kids too, the Kruger Park being an example. You name it and the youth can enjoy just about any outdoor activity. For those interested in the arts and culture, there is so much for the children of South Africa to explore.




A WHOLE WORLD IN ONE COUNTRY

There are few countries in the world that compare with South Africa's scenic splendor and diversity of leisure options: game reserves, mountain resorts, spectacular beaches and cosmopolitan cities offer a variety of experiences for all interests. The traveler can combine game viewing in the rich bushveld, wine tasting in the countryside, the casinos of Sun City and the cosmopolitan cities of Cape Town and Johannesburg all in one visit. There are tranquil beaches, tribal villages and unique coastal habitats. Situated at the tip of Africa, where the Indian and Atlantic Oceans meet, this country encompasses a diverse variety of landscapes offering stunning scenery. For the visitor, daytime diversions include bus tours, cruises, museums, art galleries, and an extensive range of sporting opportunities. Nightlife incorporates the cocktail, cabaret, and restaurant circuit, as well as film festivals and the classical performing arts. The sightseeing is magnificent, the climate sunny and mild, and the country's friendly hospitality is legendary. So whether you want to relax and soak up the sunshine, enjoy the social whirl, or follow a quest for adventure, South Africa has everything you are looking for and more. With its landscapes, history, people and wildlife, this so-called "World in One Country" is sure to provide a holiday to remember.South Africa.

TRAVELLING IN SOUTH AFRICA Every one of the nine provinces (plus Lesotho and Swaziland) holds at least a couple of compelling reasons to visit, although, depending on the time of year and your interests, you'd be wise to concentrate on either the west or the east by using Stayinsa.co.za for your accommodation needs..
While you could travel around the whole of South Africa in a matter of weeks, more satisfying approach is to focus your attention on one section of the country. The west coast of South Africa is best visited in the warmer months (Nov-April),has the outstanding attraction of Cape Town , worth experiencing for its matchless setting beneath Table Mountain, at the foot of the continent. Half a day's drive from here can take you to any other destination in the Western Cape , a province which owes its distinctive character to the fact that it has the longest-established colonial heritage in the country. You'll find gabled Cape Dutch architecture, historic towns and vineyard-covered mountains in the Winelands ; forested coast along the Garden Route ; and a dry interior punctuated by Afrikaner dorps in the Little Karoo. If the west sounds a bit too pretty and you're after a more "African"
experience, head for the eastern side of South Africa, it is best visited in the
cooler months (May-Oct). Johannesburg is more likely to be your point of
entry to this area: its frenetic street life, soaring office blocks and lively mix of people make it quite unlike anywhere else in South Africa. Half a day awayby car lie the Northern Province and Mpumalanga, which share the mighty Kruger National Park . Of South Africa's roughly two dozen major parks, the Kruger Park attracts the largest number of first-time visitors, and is unrivalled on the continent for its cross-section of mammal species. A visit to Kruger National Park combines perfectly with the KwaZulu-Natal which lies to the south. An excellent short cut is to drive through tiny, landlocked Swaziland , which has attractions all of its own: a unique Swazi culture and a number of well-managed game parks. KwaZulu-Natal offers superb game and bird life; Hluhluwe-Umfolozi Park is the best place in the world to see endangered rhinos and there are several other outstanding small game reserves nearby, such as Ithala, Mkhuze and Ndumo. For hiking and nature, nothing rivals the soaring Drakensberg range. After Cape Town, Durban remains the only city in South Africa worth visiting in its own right: a busy cultural melting pot with a bustling Indian district and lively beachfront. The long stretch of beaches north
and south of Durban is the most developed in the country, but north towards the Mozambique border lies the wildest stretch of coast in South Africa.
With time in hand, you might want to drive through the sparse but exhilarating interior of South Africa, with its open horizons, switchback mountain passes, rocks, scrubby vegetation and isolated dorps . The Northern Cape and Northwest Province can reveal surprises. Visit the western section of the Northern Cape in August or September, and you'll be treated to a riot of colourful wild flowers . From the staunchly Afrikaner heartland of Free State , you're well poised to visit the undeveloped kingdom of Lesotho , set in the mountains between the Free State and KwaZulu-Natal. Lesotho has few vestiges of royalty left today, but it does offer plenty of spectacular highland scenery, best explored on a sturdy, sure-footed Lesotho pony. Long sandy beaches , developed only in pockets, are characteristic of much of the 2500km of shoreline that curves from the cool Atlantic along the Northern Cape round to the subtropical Indian Ocean that foams onto
KwaZulu-Natal's shores. Jeffrey's Bay on the Eastern Cape coast is reputed to be one of the world's top surfing spots. Much of the Eastern Cape coast is equally appealing, whether you just want to stroll, sunbathe or take in backdrops of mountains and hulking sand dunes. Scuba diving , especially in KwaZulu-Natal, opens up a world of coral reefs rich with colourful fish, and southeast of the Western Cape winelands, along the Whale Coast , is one of South Africa's unsung attractions - some of the best shore-based whale-watching in the world.

