Rocky Mountain News

In the old days (if I may be forgiven for calling them that) when American cities were still isolated villages struggling to establish toeholds, their local newspapers were gems. For they did more than just post local news. They sometimes had the only telegraph, and were hence the sole link to the world beyond.

As "civilization" spread (forgive me for that word) those rural newspapers gradually grew in stature, gobbling up the weaker ones and becoming tower blocks that kept politicians on the hop. In their basements though, they still stored society's collective memories in mouldering broadsheets, and that's what makes them extra-special custodians of those half-forgotten days.
Prior to this, Rocky editorial staff had been hard at work with every initiative they could dream of. " Perhaps ," they thought, " if the Internet is strangling us we should cut loose and join it ." What they didn't realize though is that the Web is a branch line, and not an express way. After all, why should subscribers pay for electronic news, when everybody else is giving it away for free.

Was there enough time to turn the Rocky Mountain around? It's quite a story, and a path that many local newspapers have trod before. Read on. Discover what happened. Remember though that progress is a good thing but does have victims too.

Many of these victims were to be staff members loyal to Rocky Mountain News for decades. Let's take time out to remember who they were, and in terms of a message they sent at the time to everybody who would listen too.


In parallel, the editorial staff of Rocky Mountain News had harnessed the power of the internet even more effectively. They launched a website with the url an acronym of " I want My Rocky Mountain ". It's long gone now and don't even try to visit it because you'll find something you may not like. At the time though, this aimed at keeping Rocky alive and well. It was launched one Sunday night a week after E.W. Scripps had put the paper up for sale up for sale - and had said it could cease publication if no buyer emerged .
The I Want My Rocky.Com Website urged visitors to share memories, and to suggest ways to keep the 149-year-old newspaper (and Colorado's oldest business) alive.
" We meet in this strange place in a noble effort to save the Rocky Mountain News ," Rocky columnist Mike Littwin penned historically. " And, if we cannot save the Rocky, we can, at minimum, make some noise before we go ." A group of Rocky Mountain News reporters, editors, photographers and other staff issued this statement the next evening: Sunday night at 7 p.m. the Web site www.iwantmyrocky.com was launched to make the case as to why Rocky Mountain News is worth saving. The site gives staffers and readers the opportunity to express why the newspaper is important to them. We hope that this will put a real face to what many see merely as a business transaction, and serve as a timely reminder of the important role the paper played in Denver and in the state of Colorado for the last one half centuries.
A page tabbed on the landing page provided contact information for Scripps, and the following message that it urged readers to convey to them: Dear <E.W. Scripps Board Member Name>
I want my Rocky Mountain News. You have the power to keep it open. Please dont let my community lose its oldest newspaper. Your Details


Previously Scripps C.E.O. Rich Boehne had said that Rocky was heading to lose $15 million in the current year (partly blamed on the economic downturn that has sapped advertising revenue). He also mentioned that Rocky published in terms of a federally-sanctioned joint operating agreement with rival Denver Post. The latter's owned by newspaper conglomerate MediaNews Group and the two papers run independent newsrooms -but share business operations, including advertising sales, printing, circulation and general administration. In a further effort to raise the ante, Rocky staffers appeared with 630 KHOW host Peter Boyles. Subjects included: The state of the newspaper industry in general The IWantMyRocky Website The Rocky's place in Denver history.
The first hour featured reporter Kevin Flynn, business reporter David Milstead and sports columnist Sam Adams live. This was followed by a second hour during which Flynn, political reporter Lynn Bartels, assistant sports editor Steve Foster and TV and radio critic Dusty Saunders made further, salient points. Greetings from I Want My Rocky.Com

We invite you into this strange virtual room, hoping you can help us save Rocky Mountain News.Even if our efforts are in vain, at least we tried one more time, and made some noise before we went. We've been hoping a kind billionaire would join our cause, s ince the day the proposed sale of Rocky was announced . So now we are turning to non-billionaires instead. That's because we think there may be more of you who might be more generous too. Who we are, and what we're doing Ever since Denver was a pile of shacks and gold mining tents, the Rocky Mountain News has chronicled each day of our communal life. We covered the Civil War, Colorado's Ascension to Statehood, the Ludlow Massacre, Both World Wars, the Great Depression, 6 Broncos Super Bowls, 2 Stanley Cup Championships, 2 National Political Conventions, the Tragedy at Columbine School, the Fires of 2002,the Iraq War Home Front, and all of Colorado's other booms and busts. Could this latest bust be our last? Has it really come to this? The owners of our paper have put it and us up for sale like so many unwanted chattels, and even hinted at shutting us down completely if they can't find their buyer. We are fighting back. We, reporters, editors, photographers, web producers and everyone else who brings you Rocky have made our stand. We are proud of what we have been doing for our readers, our community and our industry. And that's just as predecessors William Byers, William A.H. Loveland, Damon Runyon, Mary Coyle Chase and Gene Amole did too. If nothing happens by the middle of January 2009 the owners could close Rocky forerver. Surely Colorado deserves better than this? Hence our bringing our case to you as readers, friends and neighbors. Through this Web Site and other efforts we believe that Rocky Mountain News may yet be saved;
Preserve and protect the editorial voice of Rocky in our community. Preserve and protect the legacy of Rocky and its historical archives, which give a unique perspective on the birth of our State and also the ity of Denver too. Fight for the jobs of more than 200 Coloradans and the many others who would be affected by our newspaper's closure. Respectfully signed
Rocky reporters Kevin Flynn, Lynn Bartels, David Milstead, sports columnist Sam Adams,assistant sports editor Steve Foster, news editor Curt Anderson and veteran broadcast columnist Dusty Saunders.
Let's Salute the Real Heart and Soul of Rocky Now, Your Servants Meet the Rocky in All Her Huge Variety
John Ensslin, reporter, Cliff Foster, assistant cityeditor, Mark Humbert, presentation editor, Kevin Huhn, deputy sports editor, Christina Guerrero, city desk clerk, Julie Poppen, reporter, Bernie Lincicome, sports columnist, Myung Kim, reporter, Anthony Welch, part-time presentation editor, Mel Pomponio, page designer and Rocky Guild chairwoman, Bruce Leaf, copy editor, Curt Anderson, news editor, Cindy House, presentation editor, Kimberly Humphreys,presentation editor, Barry Gutierrez, photojournalist, David Montero, reporter,Sandra Fish, presentation editor, Kevin Vaughan, reporter, Tim Burroughs, copyeditor, John Moore, copy editor, Michael Hall, graphic artist, Steve Haigh,business Web editor, Hector Gutierrez, reporter, Hereward Bradley, copy editor,Mark Christopher, copy editor, Jaime Aguilar, imaging/multimedia specialist, Mary Voelz Chandler, art & architecture critic, Todd Hartman, environmental reporter, Lisa Bornstein, theater critic, Lynn Bartels, politics reporter, Josephine Badovinac, presentation editor, Judy DeHaas, photojournalist, Greg McElvain,copy editor, Brian Clark, assistant presentation director, Steve Foster,assistant sports editor, Dave Krieger, sports columnist, Sam Adams, sports columnist, Alexandra Obregon, presentation editor, Tom Auclair, presentation editor, Kevin Flynn, transportation reporter, Greetings and Not Farewell from iwantmyrocky.com. Their next step was to "Appeal to Rome". Well, not exactly Rome, because they weren't Catholics and it's doubted the Pope would have responded. It's actually an expression from B.C. times, when any Roman Citizen found guilty of a crime in a Roman Colony had the right to appeal to the Courts at Rome. And they had Senators in Washington too, the campaign leader chuckled.

And so began their project to flood Colorado Senator's office with copies of the following letter, each signed by different individuals or groups. The call to action read:

Contact Senator Salazar in any of these ways:


And thus , the battle lines were finally drawn. On the one side stood a rag-tag assembly of journalists, the anti-internet brigade, historians calling back the past, and good old-fashioned truth. On the other side were arrayed economic realty, a harsh business called Scripps and the imperative for business to make a profit.

Nevertheless, the impassioned plea to write to the Colorado Senator ended bravely thus:


As the battle lines hardened and the nation watched, a third-force emerged content to watch the loss of Rocky from the sidelines. Their take was that Rocky Mountain News was passing through a moment of remission - as dying patients often do - before finally subsiding.
Sadly, this is all history now. Economic sense had dictated that Rocky Mountain News was as doomed as the the Dinosaurs once were. For the paper though, the threat did not come from a comet screaming in from outer space. It was more what some called progress, and some ironic tragedy.

What's never mentioned are the other community newspapers that Rocky squeezed out of business over time. Or the huge advantages that the internet has brought either. I'm going to close with the reminiscences of Melissa Pomponio I harvested recently. In case you don't know, she was Denver Newspaper Guild Unit Chair for the Rocky newsroom, and a damned good editorial staffer too .

