promotes the general welfare of low income families by raising their levels of nutrition to avoid hunger and malnutrition.

Food Assistance now uses a debit-like card instead of coupons or what used to be called food stamps. This is called an electronic benefits transfer card or EBT card. You may use your EBT Card at most grocery stores, supermarkets, food co-ops, and farmers' markets.The plastic card can be used to buy nutritious foods. Foods like meat and fish, vegetables and fruits, dairy products, and bread. You may not use food assistance to buy alcohol, tobacco, paper products, or pet food.

Civil Rights Statement for the Food Assistance Program
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, religion, political beliefs, or disability.

To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 or (202) 720-6382 (TTY). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer .
Food stamp program across the US:

1. Food Assistance in Iowa

Who Can Get Help?


To get help from most of our programs, you must:

Be a U.S. citizen
U.S citizens who benefit from SSI or the Family Investment Program (FIP), OR meet the food assistance program guidelines and any other rules that apply to their household, AND have, or apply for, a social security number for all household members Legal immigrant children. If you are an immigrant child under the age of 18 or the parent of an immigrant child under the age of 18, you will be able to receive food stamps for that child if he or she is a lawful resident of the United States. You are a victim of domestic violence. Certain types of victims of domestic violence may be eligible to receive food stamps. Consult an attorney to see if you qualify under this provision Legal immigrants with disabilities. If you are a lawful resident of the U.S. and receive a disability benefit, you will be eligible for food stamps. Examples of disability benefits are Supplemental Security Income (SSI), disability-related medical assistance, disability-based general assistance, disability-related Medicaid, or disability assistance awarded to veterans or spouses and children of veterans. Under certain conditions, an elderly person who has a disability (and his or her spouse) living with others can still get food stamps even though someone else buys and prepares their food. The criteria for this are: the person is eligible for food stamps, AND the person cannot buy and fix his or her meals independently because of a permanent disability, AND
the person is living in a household where income of other members is at or less than 165% of poverty. Live in Iowa Provide a social security number or proof of application for a number Meet income and resource limits (these vary from program to program) Provide all information needed to determine eligibility and benefit level You can work and still get food assistance. You can own a house and a car and still get food assistance. You can be getting social security, supplemental security income (SSI), unemployment, or welfare and still get food assistance. You don't have to live with children to get food assistance

Who Cannot Get Food Stamps?

While many low-income persons can get food stamps, some people cannot get food stamps. You cannot get food stamps if you: Under the Farm Bill, the only group of legal immigrants who will NOT qualify for food stamps are adults who arrived within the past five years and do not currently receive a "disability benefit." However, once you have been a legal resident in the U.S. for five years, you can then apply for food stamps . Are enrolled in a college and do not work 20 hours per week, do not get federal money, or are under 18 or over 50, or getting welfare (FIP). Live in a hospital, jail or another institution that serves meals. Were convicted of a drug felony for conduct after August 22, 1996. Are unemployed and able-bodied between the ages of 18 and 50, have no children, and already got 3 months of benefits during the past 36 month period while unemployed. Are on strike, unless you were eligible before going on strike.

How Do I Get Food Stamps? Go to your county Department of Human Services office.
The county DHS office serving your county is also listed in the State or County Government section of your local phone book, under "Department of Human Services" or just "Human Services". You can also call the state Department of Human Services to find out. The telephone number is 1-800-972-2017 or call 515-281-6899. If you want to see the application before going to the office, you can find it in English and Spanish on the Internet at: http://www.dhs.state.ia.us/FinancialHealthandWorkSupports/nutrition.asp You must fill out an application form to get most of our services.
You can fill out the form online, print out an application form and mail it in, or get an application form from any Department of Human Services (DHS) office.
To apply online: go to http://www.yesfood.iowa.gov.
Iowa Department of Human Services offices have the forms you need. You must also cooperate with the Iowa Department of Human Services. They will verify your information. The project will expand its currently existing toll-free number staffed by people who can answer general questions about food stamps. Iowa intends to make skilled eligibility workers available from 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM weekdays to answer all types of questions about food stamps and to begin the application process for applicants. The workers at the call center will be able to take applications over the phone and process change reports. Iowa also plans to re-design all of the forms it uses to administer the Food Stamp Program and to translate them into Spanish. Lastly, Iowa will coordinate the training of call center personnel, link with community outreach efforts, and monitor of the effectiveness of the call center and outreach efforts.
Call the Food Assistance Call Center at 1-877-YES-FOOD (1-877-937-3663) for help with applying for Food Assistance.

What Do I Need to Bring with Me When I Apply for Food Assistance?
If you cannot get all these things together right now, apply anyway. This is important because they figure your benefits from the day you give the food assistance office your signed application. You must, however, bring the remaining items later: I.D. showing your name and address. Proof of social security number (or proof that you have applied for a social security number) for all household members. Proof of your monthly earnings, such as recent pay stubs. Copy of check or benefit statement from social security, pensions, SSI, or other unearned income. If not a U.S. citizen, proof of legal alien status. Medical bills of household members sixty years or older and have a disability, if these bills are not paid by insurance or Medicaid or Medicare. Bankbook or current bank statement, if you have one. Receipts for child care costs. Utility and rent bills (or proof of mortgage and property tax payments, if you own your home.) You may also be required to verify other information about your household status. Prescreening Tool to determine if you may be eligible for Food Assistance benefits Go to the USDA's Applicants and Recipients web page and click on the On-Line Prescreening Tool link. A similar tool is used in the online application. Once I've Applied, How Long Will It Take to Get My Food Stamps? If you qualify, you will get food stamps within 30 days of the date your local Food Stamp Office gets your application. Some people with emergencies may be able to get emergency food stamps within 7 days of an application. Other persons applying will be told within 30 days if they are eligible. If you are issued food stamps in booklets and your food stamps get loose from the booklet cover, keep the cover. Stores cannot accept any food stamps without a booklet cover except for the $1 kind. If the cashier owes you change from a food stamp purchase, up to 99 cents of it can be in coins. Change in even dollar amounts will be given to you in $1 food stamps. What if I am told I cannot receive food stamps? Even if you fall into one of the above categories, you must meet certain financial criteria in order to be eligible for food stamps. If your application is denied, ask why. You have a right to appeal. You can also contact your local Iowa Legal Aid office for help. If you think you should be getting food assistance and did not get it, or the amount of assistance seems less than you think it should be, contact your local Department of Human Services (DHS) office. You should ask for a hearing. You can request a hearing verbally or write and ask for a hearing. You should also contact your local Iowa Legal Aid office. Call 1-800-532-1275 for the toll free telephone number of the office serving your county Some households are required to report on their household circumstances every month. Other households are required to report changes in household circumstances when they become known. You may report changes by calling the food stamp office. However, it is better to write down the change and mail it to the office.

If you are eligible for food stamps, you will be told what information to report and when to report.

As mentioned before, you will be applying for food stamps for a household of people who qualify for the program. If someone in your family is not a member of the household that can get food stamps, you do not have to say anything about that person but you do have to include that person's income.

When you apply, you must sign a statement saying either: Every person in the household who will get food stamps is a US citizen; OR What the immigration or naturalization status is for any household members who are not US citizens, for all those who are going to get food stamps.

You must provide your Social Security number. Those who do not have a Social Security number cannot get food stamps. You must also register for work unless you are exempt. People who are not going to get food stamps do not need to give a Social Security number.

It is extremely important that you report changes, so that your household gets the right amount of food stamps. If you get any extra food tamps because you have not reported the right information, you will have to pay back the value of the extra food stamps.


What is The Resource Limit for Getting Food Assistance?
Resources are things you own like your home and car as well as cash you have in the bank, stocks, or U.S. savings bonds. Not all of your resources will be counted. To get food assistance the value of your counted resources must not be more than: $2,000 for most households; $3,000 for households of one or more if at least one person is 60 years or older, or has a disability.

What Kinds of Resources Can I Have and Still Be Eligible for Food Assistance? your home and the land it's on, most personal belongings, and farm or business property are not counted toward the resource limit. At least one motor vehicle per household is not counted as a resource no matter what the value of the vehicle. Other vehicles in the household may also not be counted as a resource depending on how they are used or their value. pension plans whether the funds were contributed by the employer or employee as well as tax-deferred or tax-advantage retirement accounts are not counted. This includes 401 K plans, IRA accounts, and, IPERS. NOTE : This rule is new with the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008. Food stamps can only be used for food and for plants and seeds to grow food for your household to eat. You can spend food stamps like cash at most stores that sell food. The cashier may ask you to show your food stamp ID. Sales tax cannot be charged on items bought with food stamps.

Food stamps cannot be used to buy: Any nonfood item, such as pet foods; soaps, paper products, and household supplies; grooming items, toothpaste, and cosmetics Any food marketed to be heated in the store Hot foods that are ready to eat Any food that will be eaten in the store Vitamins and medicines Alcoholic beverages and tobacco