Kenmore Gas Fired Residential Water Heaters


Kenmore has a great reputation when it comes to home appliances because they have everything from washing machines, dishwashers and refrigerators. The company has an excellent inventory of home appliances that would look great in any home and also provides their customers with high efficiency and cost effective products. Kenmore has an impressive line of water heaters to help with your water needs.

Kenmore stands behind every product they sell and they have excellent warranties. There are two Kenmore Water Heaters that stand out the Kenmore Power Miser 9, which is a 50-gallon Gas Fired Water Heater and the Kenmore 40 Gallon Gas Fired Water Heater.

These gas fired water heaters are for residential use only and they are high performance and high quality water heaters.

Kenmore Power Miser 9 Gas Fired Water Heater

The Kenmore Gas Fired Water Heater contains Foamite Insulation that helps contribute to the efficiency of the water heater. The Cold Water inlet Tubes or Dip Tubes are made from a strong PEXAN Polymer, which will contribute to the long life of the water heater. The insulation R Valve is 8 and the depth of the insulation is about one inch. The unit also has an energy saving pilot and nylon drain valve. It also has a factory installed temperature and pressure safety valve and an aluminum steel multi-port burner. The Kenmore Power Miser 9 has a 50-gallon water tank with an hourly BTU rate of 50,000. The recovery rate on this water heater is 51.2 gallons per hour and the amount of Therms per year on this system is 254. The gas type is a standard natural gas and a required venting size of 4″. There is a 9 year limited warranty for both parts and for the tank. It is important to read the warranty information, so you will have an understanding about what is covered and what is not. Never try to install a water heater yourself; it would be a good idea to call a qualified plumber to install your unit.
Kenmore 40 Gallon Gas Fired Water Heater

The Kenmore 40 Gallon is a Gas Fired Residential Water Heater. This water heater is an energy efficient water heater that has been rated with Energy Star Rating and a self-cleaning unit that includes their own Roto-Swirl cold water inlet tube or dip tube. It is Cobalt Blue with a special coating to protect the water heater from rust and corrosion. The unit has a factory installed Temperature and Pressure Relief Valve and a BTU of 40,000. This gas fired water heater uses Natural Gas only and its recovery rate for the Kenmore 40 Gallon Gas Fired Water Heater is 40.9 gallons/hr. The minimum vent should be 3″ or 4″ and a 20″ in diameter.
So, if you are looking to replace your old style water heater with a new one consider Kenmore.




Takagi Tankless Gas Fired Water Heater


Takagi Tankless Water Heater Model T K3

Takagi Tankless Gas Fired Water Heaters are one of the smallest tankless water heaters in the industry. One of the features of the Takagi Tankless Water Heaters is that they are great for small homes and condominiums but you can attach up to three other units for larger homes and multiple family homes and because they are so small and compact, they can actually fit in between two wall studs, so the place of installation is not limited to the basement. The Takagi Series offers on demand hot water that can be fueled by either Natural Gas or Propane. The water heaters are considered to be flash water heaters and they start with electronic ignitions for safety.

There are three different models in the Takagi Tankless Gas Fired Water Heaters:
the Takagi T-K3, the Takagi T-K3-OS and the Takagi MOBIUS T-M1
Takagi T-K3 Tankless Gas Fired Water Heater is one of the most compact tankless water heaters in the industry.

The Takagi T K3 Tankless Water HeaterTakagi Gas Fired Tankless Water Heater can be installed inside in colder weather states and outside if you live in milder winter conditions such as California or Florida. The T-K3 can be used in conjunction with any hydronic heating systems like the Radiant UnderFloor Systems and the Hydronic Baseboard Heating. The T-K3 offers a power input when used with natural gas or propane of 11,000 to 199,000 BTU's. The minimum water pressure on the T-K3 of 15 PSI and a maximum of 150 PSI. For installation you will need a gas connection of " male NPT and the water connection of " male NPT. The electrical supply of the Takagi T-K3 Tankless Gas Fired Water Heater is 120 volts and 0.77 amps. The flow rate of the water recovery ranges from 40 degrees Fahrenheit to 90 degrees Fahrenheit with gallons per minute range from 7.0 gpm to 3.7 gpm. The higher the water temp the lower the gallons per minute will be.The unit measures in at 20-1/2″ H x 13.8″ W X 8-1/2″ D.


Takagi T-K3-OS Tankless Gas Fired Water Heater

What sets the Takagi T-K3-OS Tankless Gas Fired Water Heater apart from the rest is that this unit is eligible for a 2009 Tax Credit.

FEATURES;

This unit has a built in power venting system which means that the unit has an outdoor installation. Like the T-K3, the T-K3-OS is a compact tankless gas fired water heater, measuring at 13.8″ wide and the unit weighs a light 40 pounds. The T-K3-OS has an On Demand Instant Water Heater that begins to heat up water at 0.5 gallons per minute and can have an endless stream of hot water from as low as 0.4 gallons per minute to 7.0 gallons per minute. The Takagi T-K3-OS Tankless Gas Fired Water Heater offers an unlimited supply of hot water on a continuing basis. The reason for that is because the unit does not have a storage tank to heat and reheat water, it comes right from the water heater.
The Takagi T-K3-OS Tankless Gas Fired Water Heater is rated with a high efficiency rating and it is said to be environmentally friendly. It has a thermal rating of 83%, which goes both for liquid propane and natural gas. The unit will only burn gas when the unit is calling for hot water and this will save you a great deal on your gas bills. The system has 4 separate temperature settings ranging from 113 to 167 degrees Fahrenheit.


Takagi MOBIUS T-M1 Gas Fired Tankless Water Heater

The Takagi MOBIUS T-M1 Gas Fired Tankless Water Heater is one of the stronger tankless water heaters in the series because it can effectively heat three showers at the same time. With some systems, you have to wait for half an hour or more to take a shower after the last person took a shower. Not only this unit is great for large homes but for hotels, motels and apartment buildings as well. They are space savers as well as cost effective water heaters.

You can link up to 20 units using a single main control system. These units are small enough to fit anywhere. The Takagi MOBIUS T-M1 Gas Fired Tankless Water Heater has an Input BTU Rate with Natural Gas of 25,000 to 235,000 and when used with liquid propane you will get a 25,000 to 225,000 BTU's. The unit when used with natural gas has an energy factor of .81 and a thermal efficiency of 82.3% and when used with liquid propane, you have an energy factor of .84 and a thermal efficiency of 84.7%. The unit is a Combustion Fan Assisted unit with a gas and water connection of " NPT. The water pressure is a minimum of 15 PSI and 150 PSI and its unit has an electronic ignition with an electrical supply of 120 volts with 0.8 amps. The Takagi Tankless Gas Fired Water Heaters are perfect for any installation application. With the compact units you can see the savings on your gas bills as well as your electric bills.



US Craftsman 40 Gallon Self Cleaning Gas Water Heater


US Craftsman has been serving the heating industry for many years. They have a superior inventory that houses only the best water heaters in the industry.

One of their standout water heaters is the US Craftsman 40 Gallon Self Cleaning Gas Water Heater. This water heater offers a high quality material so the heater can last long.

The 40 Gallon Self-Cleaning Gas Water Heater has a self powered microprocessor programmable control device. There is no electrical outlet needed because you can simply program your water heater from any place in your home. No more procrastination of going to the basement to adjust the water heater -- you can do it all with a simple touch of the controls. This will save you time as well as money.
The unit comes with a self-diagnostic monitor with 8 important functions that will let you know when your water heater is having even the slightest problem. With this feature you will be able to get a technician before your problem become a bigger one. There are 3 selections for operation on your water heaters, choose the one that you believe can save you money on your gas bill as well as your electrical bill.
The US Craftsman 40 Gallon Self Cleaning Gas Water Heater has also a Flame Guard Safety System with a Flammable Vapor Ignition. This means that the flame Guard System protects the water heater from gases that may escape into the water heater. The water heater is also Child Resistant at which there aren't any parts that your child can break or get hurt on. The water heater comes with a factory installed Temperature and Pus-craftsmanressure Gauge, which allows the water heater to run safely without any backup from the system. There is a Resettable Thermal Switch that has a flammable vapor incident trigger, which has a thermal safety switch that will turn off the gas supply in case of an emergency.
The water heaters are insulated with a NON CFC Foam Insulation designed to help keep the water in the tank and keep the unit running efficiently. Adding to the efficiency of the water heater is the aluminized Steel Multi Port with a Low NOx Burner. The burner will put out lower emissions of gases that will work with the environment as well as save you money. The US Craftsman 40 Gallon Self Cleaning Gas Water Heater will get a Piezo Ignition with a Pilot Reset Button and a Pilot Light Window.

The heater is compact; the measurements are 62″ in height and 18″ in diameters. It has a 40,000 Btu's per hour and it uses Natural Gas only. This water heater will heat water and space heating for a family of 4. The US Craftsman 40 Gallon Self Cleaning Gas Water Heater is equipped with their own Energy Smart System, this system is guaranteed to help you save money as well as get a perfectly running system.

The water heaters are best used in residential homes and have a 12-year warranty.






AO Smith Pro Max Direct Vent Water Heater

You may recognize the name AO Smith from boilers or maybe motors but they are most recognized for water heaters.

They have an extensive line of water heaters; one of their premier models is the ProMax Direct Vent Residential Gas Water Heater. The direct vent design features:

- a single pipe with a two channel closed combustion system.
- The air comes from the outside rather than the inside.
- The outside air works best with the direct vent system because the outside air won't have the same problems that indoor air does.

The best part of the direct vent system is that the air intake is a horizontal intake design. The installation works on all models that are up to 80 inches from the outside wall and there is no electrical use at all which will save you money right away. The ProMax Direct Vent Water Heater has 4 different models, the gallon capacity ranges from 40 to 75 gallons.

The ProMax is a high efficiency water heater that is called the Green Choice Gas Burner designed with AO Smith's patented eco-friendly design that includes a reduction up to 33% in NOx emissions. Some other features that contribute to the energy efficient water heater are the Heat Trap Nipples, these nipples come factory installed and they are designed to keep all water in the system as well as protect against any heat loss. Unlike other water heater systems that can be annoying to light, the ProMax makes the lighting of the pilot quick and easy because it is equipped with a Push Button Piezo Igniter. The Push Button system is easy, simply push the button and it will spark up the boiler.
The AO Smith ProMax is coated with their own coating called Permaglas that helps seal the water heater and it is as well rust and corrosion proof prolonging its life. The water heater has the company's DYNACLEAN Diffuser Tip, this works to help stop the amount of sediment that may build up on the water heater over a period of time. Plus it works to help maximize the hot water output.
Before buying this or any water heater, you should read the requirements for installation. Here are just a few of these requirements for the ProMax water heater:

- You must have a maximum horizontal vent distance of 80 inches from the outside of the exterior wall. You must have at least 30″ of room in order to install the unit.

- AO Smith recommends a height installation for the heater vent pipe to be 68 inches for the 40-gallon models and 76 inches for the 50 gallon and 75 gallon models.




GE Indoor Tankless Water Heater Model GN94DNSRSA


GE short for General Electric has been one of the most recognized names in the business by providing quality appliances to homeowners for over 100 years. The GE Gas Fired Water Heater Model GN94DNSRSA is one of their best water heaters in their inventory. It has an Input Btu of 199,000 and an energy efficiency rating of 82%.

The GE Indoor Tankless Water Heater Model GN94DNSRSA is designed for Indoor applications. The control panel on this unit is an Integrated Electronic LED that offers the homeowner simple, easy to read displays that lets the homeowner know when there is a problem with the water heaters operations.

The minimum operating pressure of the water heater is 20 psi with a maximum of 150 psi. The minimum gas supply pressure is 5 WC and the maximum gas supply is 10.50 WC. With normal electrical consumption the water heater will operate at 75 watts and when the unit is on standby it uses 2.8 watts. The GE Indoor Tankless Water Heater Model GN94DNSRSA has a flow rate capacity of 9.40 @ 35 degrees rising temperature and a 77 degree rising temperature with a flow of rate of 4.3.


The Indoor Tankless Water Heater offers 258 gallons in the first hour delivery. We mentioned earligeneral-eleCtric-250x250er that the energy efficiency rating on this unit is 82%, this calculates to an operating cost of $ 223 per year to run the water heater and that is a great number. Other units can run $ 400 to $ 500 a year to ruin their water heaters.

The Water Heater is a Direct Vent System, the intake and exhaust size is 5″ x 3″. The gas connection sizes have an inlet of " Male NPT, the Hot Water Outlet is also " Male NPT and the Water Inlet uses a " Male NPT.
The unit is compact in size and can be installed in low ceiling basements and some closets too. The measurements of this unit are 9-13/16 inches in depth, 22-7/8 inches in height and 14 inches in width. The Heat System is a Demand Activate Technology and there is an Overheat Protection System too wherein ignition system is a Direct Electronic Ignition. The unit even has a temperature setting memory installed.

The GE Indoor Tankless Water Heater Model GN94DNSRSA is a great way to help you save money on your hot water and heating needs. This water heater offers high efficiency and high performance operation.

The GE Indoor Tankless Water Heater Model GN94DNSRSA has a 5 year limited parts warranty and a limited 10-year warranty on the Heat Exchanger. The labor is covered by the warranty of 1 year for the entire unit.





It is as well important to read the warranty information, so you become familiar with what is covered and what is not.

Lastly, do as much research as you can on any water heater that you are thinking of buying. It will be a huge investment and you want to get the most for your money.