If your parents areliving alone, you may plan a get together over lunch, dinner or teainviting all your siblings along with their families. This will bea pleasant surprise for your mother. You may also invite herfriends along with their families and host a big Mothers Day party.Ensure that you have your mother's favorite food as a part of themenu. Remember to play her favorite music.
Mothers Day Gamesand Activities (Ideas for Children)
Mothers Day is an occasion which calls youto spend quality time with your mother. It will be a great idea toindulge in Mothers Day games and activities. This will help you get closer toyour mother and also have a memorable holiday.
Here are some interesting ideas for gamesand activities for celebrating Mother's Day. Purpose of organizing theseactivities on Mother's Day is to show her how deeply you loveher.
2.Organize a Skit or aPlay
Along with siblings, cousinsand friends, you can organise a skit or a play on Mothers Day. Itwill make your mom feel special to have a play hosted just forher. You may surprise her with your hidden talents as this willmake her feel proud to be your mother.

3. Organize an Interview
It's great idea to organise a specialinterview with your mother on Mother's Day. Call it "Coffee withMom" or or think of any other name. In case have a camcorder, thenyou must record the event. This session will also help you knowmore about your mother. You can dig your mother about herchildhood, her friends, her teachers, her husband and her children.You may ask her how she met your father and her best moments in life. This is a great way to make your mother feel important on herspecial day. Remember to express your love for her and to thank herfor all that she has done at the end of the interview.
4. PlayGames
You can celebrate Mother's Day by playing indooror outdoor games with your mother. Planan outdoor game i f she is an active person and likes to play badminton, tennis or any other outdoor game. You may also play carom, chess, cards or any game that she is fond of and spend time with her. Youcan also play several online games with yourmother.
6. TeaParty
You may organize tea parties inhonor of your mother on the occasion of Mother's Day. Pick up thebest crockery, decorate a tray by using a beautiful tray cover anda vase of fresh flowers. Compliment the tea with her favorite snack and a delicious cake.
7. Craft Activities
Mothers Day can also be celebratedby participating in craft activities together. Mothers can workalong with little children and have fun. Grown up children maysurprise their mothers with some craft work specially made fortheir mother.

FirstMother's Day A woman's first Mothers Day is the time fora new mother to celebrate first mother's day. On the special day ofa new mother, as the baby is too young to say thanks, the dayshould be celebrated by the child's father, close relatives andfriends. Fathers must realize that it is really tiresome for amother to handle the infant all the time. She should be given adays rest and fathers must take responsibility of looking after thechild at least for a day. It would be a great idea to pamper themother with flowers and a gift. She would forget the drudgery ofchild rearing and at the same time feel proud of being amother.First Mothers Day is also the time when a woman realizes thetrue value of her own mother. The mothers words, "You will notunderstand the importance of all I do for you till you yourselfbecome a mother!" sound so meaningful. A new mother feels all themore grateful to her own mother for being socaring. The Mother ofAll
Mother Teresa (1910-1997) was the mother ofall human beings and she lived with a single purpose in her lifeand it was 'to serve the needy'. She was born in Albania and herreal name was Agnes Gonxha Bojaxhiu. She loved India and shedecided to make the country her home. She became a nun and opened acongregation that was named as 'Missionaries of Charity' inKolkata. Mother Teresa always shared her life with the sick, poorand the orphans. She is a true picture of love anddevotion.
