You can feel the warmth, the spirituality, the charm that every Adobe home radiates, whether it's ancient or a modern replica. Why's that? It has a rounded and soft feeling without sharp corners almost like a mother's womb, because that's what the building medium demands. Most appealing of all is its simplicity though. These are the concepts that draw people back to Adobe time, and time again.

Thus it was not only the white American settlers who hanged these cultural landscapes, or the crueler Spaniards who preceded them marching behind the abused Cross of Christ. The area has been a melting pot since the dawn of time, as people struggled to learn to share the little that they had.

Today they are at peace, not war. By this I mean there are no battlefields where swords clash. Life is still a different battle though. A battle to survive in a materialistic world where they are a half-forgotten minority clinging to their lovelier past.

Pueblo People - Masters of Adobe

The Pueblos are a grouping of similar Indian tribes who lived in the southwest of America and of whom some remnants remain. Their territory included West Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and bits of Southern Colorado and Utah. The different Puebloan tribes shared similar ways of living, although they spoke various languages and had mildly different cultures. Other Puebloan tribes in Texas included the long gone prehistoric Pueblos, who once lived along the Canadian River in the Texas Panhandle, and probably on the Jumano River too. Some people struggle to understand how a group of tribes can be essentially the same and yet be so very different too. Think of European and American ways of living to get a handle on this. Europeans and Americans live in houses and buildings that are much alike. They eat similar foods and wear similar clothing. Most Americans and Europeans are Christians, but there are many different kinds of Christians too. An outsider from another planet might think that all Europeans and Americans are the same. But they speak English and French and German, and a bunch of other languages too. Europeans and Americans notice the small differences in their clothing, food and buildings. No American or European would mistake a German city for a Spanish city, or an American city for example. Thus, while Europeans and Americans share similar cultures, they are also different in important ways. The Pueblo Indians were like that too. They spoke many different languages and they had slightly different ways of doing things. There were, and still are called Hopi Puebloans, Taos Puebloans, Jimez Puebloans, Zuni Puebloans and, of course, Tigua Puebloans too. These are all different tribes. But, because they share so much common culture we group them together as Puebloan in our western minds. It's the same elsewhere in the world. We are all human beings although there are so many different languages. Sometimes religion and culture causes so much aggravation that we go to war with fearsome weapons. When you think about it carefully, this is crazy. It's time the nations learned to live together in peace and harmony. The main thing that distinguishes Puebloan Indians from other Indian native tribes is their distinctive homes, which they call Pueblos. Actually, the word Pueblo is Spanish for town . A Pueblo is also a large building with many rooms in it, not unlike a modern apartment building. In fact, some Pueblos had hundreds of people living in structures four or five stories high. In larger Pueblos, there were sometimes several individual Pueblo buildings built around an open square. Really big Pueblos like the Zuni or some of the Hopi Pueblos built, had several of these open spaces. These were used all year round for ceremonies and group activities that built up their communities. When the Spanish invaders arrived, and saw the towns and buildings, they named the people who built them the Pueblo Indians. It's just like calling the people in your street "house people".
The first thing that strikes one when viewing an old photograph of a traditional Pueblo are the wooden frames up front. These are for shade during the hot New Mexico summers, when women would spend the whole day under them. The little domes you'd see are ovens made of mud bricks. These ovens are called "hornos". The women would bake their corn tortillas and other foods in them. Sometimes, an older example has doors on the ground floor. In the old days, no Pueblo would have had doors like that. There would be ladders to get onto the roof to enter the house from on top. They could also pull the ladders up if an enemy attacked them.

In the fictitious picture I mentioned, note the rows of logs sticking out of the walls up at the top of the house that support the roof. These were built from smaller sticks laid over larger logs and covered over with mud plaster. These roofs were not ideal if it rained often or for several days on end. Fortunately, the Pueblo Indians lived in a dry and arid climate so they actually worked quite well. The layers of mud and wood were good for insulation from the heat in the summer, and from the cold of winter too.

When you think about it carefully, the Pueblo people were a blessed people before the invaders arrived. They had everything they needed to build their homes, unlike modern town and city dwellers like us who have to pay for them. Do you think that you could go out into the desert like that and live for almost nothing? When I thought about it carefully, I decided I was a little old. If you're younger and more energetic though, why not give it a try yourself? Pueblos were built in various ways. One method was to use rocks to build a wall, and then to cover over the stones with mud plaster on the outside. Another way was to use big bricks made out of dried mud. This is called Adobe brick construction, and is the focus of this article. An Adobe brick wall would be covered with a mud plaster just like the rock wall was, so both would look the same when finished. The roof was similarly made by laying large logs on top of the walls, with smaller logs and sticks laid on top and mud packed down on them. This mud roof was smoothed out to convert the roof to living space, although as pointed out this only worked in dry climates like the southwest, which was where the Pueblos lived.
A horno is a kind of oven used by Pueblo Indians to cook bread and tortillas in. Imagine you are looking at one now. Those are pueblo houses behind them. Notice the ladders to get up on the roof. They use the roof just like we use a porch for outdoor livng. They worked hard all day, and then chilled out on the roof in the afternoon. Even now that they have doors, they still use the roof like that, and still keep ladders to get up onto them. Imagine the ends of the logs sticking out of the walls on the houses too.

Did you know that Pueblo Indians are farmers? In fact, most of their food comes from the crops they plant and tend. Corn is their main source of food. Did you notice that I used the verb "is" and not "was". The Pueblos are still here and they still farm. They also raised many other crops in the olden days. For food they raised beans and squash. They also raised cotton that they used to make cloth. They planted gourds that could be dried out and used as containers. They stored and cooked their food in well-made pottery.

In fact, Pueblos are famous for their beautiful pottery. Much of this pottery bears painted designs that are considered very pretty. The men also hunted deer, rabbits, antelope, bear and any other wild game they could find for meat. The women and children meantime would collect wild foods like berries when they were in season. They also knew how to grow cotton and weave cotton cloth.

And so their clothes were mainly made of cotton. They also used leather and fur to stay warm in winter. The men would wear a breach cloth just like Tarzan wears in movies today. Now you know why the invaders thought they looked so primitive and warlike.

Unfortunately the remnants of the Pueblo peoples are just a shadow of their former glory and independent spirit. Some live in houses and follow lifestyles their ancestors would have hardly recognized - sad victims of universal advertising standards that recognize only one set of values. Today, these clothes are a mix of the old styles and materials, and new European fashions.

The land they farmed was owned by the tribe, but each family was given the right to farm a plot of land. The family never owned that land, they just benefited from it. This is called usufruct land ownership. This means the land is owned in common by the tribe, but families and individuals have the right to use certain parts. In fact, most Indian tribes owned land as a group and not as individuals too.

The men cleared the fields and prepared the soil, while the women did most of the actual farming. They used sharp sticks to poke holes in the dirt and put seeds in each hole. Remember, they didn't have any metal tools. The children would walk the fields every day and pick insects off the plants by hand and pull up weeds as they did so. Often, a small house was built in the field, so men and older children could sleep there overnight, and drive off wild animals to protect their crops.

There were important religious ceremonies to be carried out at each stage of the farming season. These included dances and ceremonies before they began to plant. There were more dances and ceremonies while the crops were growing, to bring rain and protect the crops. The biggest dances and ceremonies of came at the time of harvest.

The southwest is semi desert and very dry. Because of this, most of the Pueblos lived along the rivers and streams where they could get water for their crops. A few lived near springs where these existed. Crops like corn need at least one hundred and twenty days of frost free weather. Much of the southwest is mountains were it is cooler. This is why the Pueblos lived in valleys, were it was warmer in the spring and fall. The biggest river in this region is the Rio Grande. Before they came to Texas, the Tigu Puebloss lived along the Rio Grande River south of modern Albuquerque, New Mexico. The Tigua called their ancestral home Pueblo Gran Quivera. Gran Quivera was north of El Paso in the Manzano Mountains southeast of Albuquerque. Manzano means Apple in Spanish so these are called the Mountains of the Apple. Gran Quivera settlement was begun about 800 AD. By 1300 AD it was one of the largest Pueblos. The Spanish explorer Coronado was the first European to see Gran Quivera in 1539. He called it "Pueblo de los Humanas", which means "City of the Humans". In the 1600s, more Spaniards arrived, and established their missions and settlements in New Mexico around Gran Quivera. Tragically, with the Spanish came diseases and epidemics, that killed many of the Pueblo Indians, including the Tigua at Gran Quivera. The Spanish also sometimes kidnapped Pueblo Indians to act as slaves for them in their settlements. In the 1670s there was a severe drought that lasted several years. As a consequence, food was in short supply. The populations of Gran Quivera dwindled and got smaller. By 1675, the people were so desperate that they headed south to the Rio Grande River near modern El Paso. They settled there and started farming. Some of the Tigua went north though, to live with their close relations at Isleta Pueblo. The Isleta Puebloans spoke Tiwa just like the Tigua, and so they bonded well. As a result, Gran Quivera was left abandoned. The ruins are still there, and are protected by the National Park Service.

The Tigua still remember Gran Quivera in their prayers and songs. A verse in one song goes, in English,
"My home over there, Now I remember it,

And when I see it, the mountain far away

Oh, then I weep,
Oh, what can I do?" It would not be fair to blame the Spanish invaders entirely for this disaster. They did not take the rain away, or cause the crops to fail. However, they did disrupt traditional social structures - structures that otherwise might have cross-supported people. And thus, as always, as everywhere in the world, colonialists have to shoulder responsibility for their deeds.
In 1680. the Pueblo Indian Nation revolted against the Spanish. They drove them out of New Mexico and all the way down to El Paso. In 1681, the Spanish returned to attack Isleta Pueblo. Although many of the Isleta Puebloans managed to escape, the Spanish captured many others of them. These, they compelled to go with them to El Paso, including both the Isleta Puebloans and the Tiguas. The Isleta Indians who ran away came back later to their Pueblo and made peace with the Spanish. That's why Isleta Pueblo is still there today, and why the Isleta Pueblos still live there on a reservation.

In 1682, the Tigua and Isleta people near El Paso founded Ysleta (a different way of spelling Isleta), on a piece of land t he Spanish King had granted them . They did this to avoid confusion with the Isleta themselves. You see, by this time they had become Christians, and they wanted to build a mission church . This is still the oldest church in Texas, and the oldest mission in Texas too.
The Ysleta mission and the Pueblo people found themselves near the expanding town of El Paso. Eventually, the Tigua were living as a suburb of El Paso where they still live today. Their neighborhood is called in Spanish "El Barrio de los Indians" or "the place where Indians live". After the Americans arrived in 1848, a generation of dishonest speculators speculators stole much of this land from them.
These were still some Tigua houses near El Paso around 1900. However these were built in a style called "Jackal". Jackal houses are made of sticks stuck in the ground and then covered with mud. This is not a very good way of making permanent buildings, and they soon fell apart. That's why only very poor people built like this. Sadly, many of the once-proud Pueblo peoples were similarly poor by now.
Let's pause a little while in our story to consider what we can learn from this sorry tale. One the one hand are the Spanish living in Europe, but carrying out their conquests throughout the New World in search of gold and other wealth. They do this, because they believe that this is their God-given right.

On the far side of the ocean are the Pueblo Indians. They are content with their far simpler existence. They don't want anything from the Spanish. What they are and where they live is the will of their God too.

Initially, they welcome their Spanish visitors with open arms. When they realize the truth it is already far too late, for the enemy is already within the gates. Their sticks have no answer to cruel metal swords and spears. The truth is inevitable. They can only lose.

These days colonialists have other weapons. They call these the dollar, the ruble and the yen. People in the Third World have no weapons against this power either. Those that possess them, still trample their cultures and destroy their very lives in exchange for their raw materials. This cannot be right. No God would support it, and neither should we.

Let's Build an Adobe House Together

Let's assume we're living out west where there aren't logs large enough to build a house, or in the numbers necessary. There are no rocks either, so we do need to make another plan. One of us has heard of a material that doesn't get rickety. Its name is Adobe, a kind of mud. We look it up in Wikipedia. We learn it's actually bricks made with mud and straw - in fact the very same bricks the Hebrews in Egypt were told to make by their captors, but that time without the straw needed to reinforce it.

Finding the right kind of dirt to make Adobe can be tricky. It needs to be soil with considerable clay content - but no more than 30% - and it needs to be very dry when we find it. This is so we can break it up up and Anything larger than that will cause our bricks to crack as they dry out.

We're going to need to dig a pit, and fill this with our aggregate and water. After that, we can enjoy some mud-pie fun, as we churn it into a thick mixture by pulling off our shoes and socks, and trampling it until it's thick and gooey. After that, we can add some straw, and work that into the mud the same way . I shan't think the children will object.

Next, we're going to need a mold to shape our bricks into a consistent shape that we can use. In older Pueblo times, a mold, usually made of wood was the basis for making adobe bricks These were quite large - in fact often as big as two feet long, one foot wide, and a foot thick. The mold was packed firmly with the wet adobe mix, after which it was carefully removed. The bricks were then allowed to dry, often for several days and in a shaded area if possible. This was because if they dried too quickly in the direct sun, they would often split or crack. Let's try that, shall we?

Right, the bricks are dry now, and the ground for our house has been leveled. At last, we can begin construction. We'll use wet adobe to stick the bricks together. The lintels and window frames we'll make from whatever is available, and of course the floor will be Adobe too. Apparently out in far West Texas they sometimes had 'blood floors' made by mixing in animal blood. Fortunately we're all vegans so we can overlook that stage.

We'll cover the house outside with a thin wash of the same clay the Adobe bricks were made from, and when that has dried out we'll try to find some whitewash. That's to make our Adobe house, with thick walls and whitewashed exterior, cool in the summer, and almost like living in a cave. However, we're going to have to build a fireplace in the house too, or else it could get downright cold in winter. Pueblos coming from 'the old places' still do, although people coming from warmer Mexico don't, unless, that is they are wealthy

Our Adobe house is completed now, but has two major weaknesses. If it rains long and hard, say, over a period of a couple of weeks, it could simply disintegrate. Fortunately rain comes sparingly where we are, and so torrential rains that won't last longer than a few hours, should not affect our Adobe structure.

The other weakness is also structural. You could break into an Adobe with very little effort. All it needs is rawhide lariat. Two men, using a rawhide lariat with knots tied about every six inches, could literally saw a corner off our home in a matter of a few hours. We'll need to get a guard dog. In places where corrals were built of adobe bricks, desperadoes discovered this trick early in the last century. They could use a knotted rawhide lariat to saw a chunk out of the corral's fence - the sawing made very little noise - and be away with the horses in the middle of the night, leaving the family to wake up with just "shanks pony" the next morning.

Adobe is still used extensively in far West Texas and in New Mexico, and is in fact still the most common building material in Albuquerque, New Mexico. When I was there for the Western Writers of America's annual convention, we were told that a two-bedroom Adobe on a fifty-foot lot in Albuquerque, with no carpeting, no central heating and no air conditioning, without any appliances except a water heater, would sell for about $235,000. Ours out in the desert cost a pittance compared to that, because we built it our own bare hands.

Included in the modern Adobe architect's mind are concepts of active or passive solar design, wood framed windows, open roof beams, and brick floors with radiant heat. Some add a touch to custom homes by carving traditional Mexican designs on the interior structures and the doors. These things combine make an Adobe home true folk art, that attracts people from every part of the globe.
Today's bricks are far smaller at 14 inches long, 10 inches wide, and 4 inches high. They are still made with straw though, to make the dried mud more weather resistant, and also have a dash of asphalt added to stabilize them. These bricks can be bought at good prices from manufacturers who use modern bulldozers to mix and pour the mud into a multitude of frames simultaneously. After the mud is poured, a board is drawn across the top remove excess mud and make the surface flat.
When the bricks are dry they are removed from the molds and stacked by hand. Why is this? It's because they are relatively brittle until assembled into a wall. The cost of these bricks is about 60 cents each. - cheaper than clay bricks and part of the Adobe charm. However, Adobe bricks are also heavier than clay ones, and so the ground must not only be cleared, but also compressed before proceeding further. Next the footings are dug using a back hoe, and then hand tamped to compress the earth again. In colder areas, the footing should be about eighteen inches below the surface, to avoid temperature-based expansion and contraction as temperatures vary. Both the footings and the stem wall beneath the ground of an Adobe home must be broader too (commonly 24" and 14" respectively).
When the foundation is complete, the first layer of bricks must be made with more asphalt to make them waterproof. The mud is applied with a shovel and trowel as each course is laid the whole length of the walls, with bricks overlapping at the corners where corner poles are set. Beams of wood are placed over windows and doorways as lintels as the work proceeds. These are may be decoratively carved according to taste.


When the walls are high enough, bonding beams are laid to tie them together, following which ceiling beams are laid on top with bricks between them. Thinner hewn poles made of pine, spruce or aspen are laid over these. Twelve inches of fiberglass insulation follows as part of the pocket roof that provides space for electrical wiring, recessed lighting, and so on, topped finally by the desired roof finish. Tiling, corbels and lintels add to the uniqueness, charm (and cost) of an Adobe home. As mentioned earlier, lintels are carved beams used as headers over openings. Traditionally, when lintels were very long, corbels were added to help strengthen them. Now, corbels are used solely for decorative purposes. These are pieces of sculpted wood that fit at the ends under the lintels.
Another option is an Adobe bench, usually cut into a wall or built out from it. The Spanish carved arched niches in which they placed statues of their saints. A nicho like this can be any size or shape, and can even be as large as a built-in bookshelf or cupboard. Mexican tile work is often incorporated into bathroom and kitchen areas add a measure of color and design.
Adobe construction has it's roots in simplicity. It was born in climates where there was great space and little water. There is an honesty in the utilitarian attitude of using the surrounding earth and hewn tree trunks from the nearby forest. One Adobe resting atop another to create one solid mass creates a feeling of unchanging stability that translates into a lifestyle. This brings us to the end of our journey through the world of Adobe building. Along the way we've explored history, met the original American Adobe experts, built our own simple version (at least in our own minds) and learned how these houses are built today. I hoped you enjoyed what I wrote (and borrowed from other sources) as must I did too.