was born in Jersey City, New Jersey to middle-class Polish-American parents. She earned a partial scholarship to Barnard College in Manhattan and worked part-time as a model to be able to pay her bills. Martha married Andrew Stewart and kept modeling until she gave birth to her daughter Alexis.

Stewart worked shortly as a Wall Street stockbroker before finding her calling as a domestic statue when she launched her catering business from the basement of her Connecticut home.

Martha Stewart Becomes a Household Name:

Martha started out not as a designer or in home renovation, but as a Wall Street stockbroker. She was quite skillful at it, but she left the profession in 1973 to give more of her time to her family. She found herself knee-deep in a home renovation project instead.

She used her business acumen to start a catering business which also becomes successful. Martha was also a gourmet food market manager, and she turned it into a rich source as well. Martha was presented with the opportunity to author a cookbook while catering a job for her husband's publishing company and she accepted the offer. That book, Entertaining (ghostwritten, but developed completely by Martha), was a New York Times bestseller.

After publishing a series of cookbooks and guides, and landing as guest on TV shows from The Oprah Winfrey Show to The Early Show, she launched the magazine Martha Stewart Living that would later be the basis for her first named TV program.


Martha Stewart Omnimedia

Martha Stewart became one of the country's wealthiest women when Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia went public in 1999 at the height of dot-com mania. Stewart herself can be seen anywhere -- from everywhere with her napkin-folding tips and ambrosia salad recipes.

In September 1997, Stewart, with the assistance of business partner Sharon Patrick, was able to secure funding to purchase the various television, print, and merchandising ventures related to the Martha Stewart brand, and consolidate them into a new company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. Stewart served as chairwoman,president, and CEO of the new company and Patrick became Chief Operations Officer. Stewart felt that it would promote synergy and greater control of the brand's direction through the business' activities if all of the brand's assets are under one roof . That same month, Stewart announced in Martha Stewart Living the launch of a companion website, marthastewart.com, and a catalogue business, Martha by Mail.

On October 19, 1999, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia went public on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol MSO. The initial public offering was set at $18 per share, and rallied to $38 by the end of trading, making Stewart a billionaire on paper. The stock price slowly went down to $16 per share by February 2002. Stewart was then and continues to be the majority shareholder, with a commanding 96% control of voting power in the company.
Jail Thing

Mentioning the ImClone scandal is always a part of Martha Stewart's biography however brief it would be. The scandal leads to Martha's five-month imprisonment. The root of the scandal was the accusation that Martha, along with others, was guilty of securities fraud and obstruction of justice related to possible insider trading of ImClone stock, a biopharmaceutical company.

Martha sold ImClone stock a day before the value of the stock plunged, based on a report that drug had not received federal approval, in late 2001 because she avoided to lose more than $45,000 through the sale of that stock.

She was indicted in 2003 and stood trial in 2004 and was found guilty of conspiracy, obstruction of an agency proceeding, and making false statements to federal investigators that made her spent five-months in jail and five months in house arrest.

The conviction has caused her problems, as one might expect. She was refused a visa to enter Great Britain in June 2008 . And as a result of the 2006 settlement of the civil case against her, Martha is barred from serving as a director, or as the CEO, CFO, and other high ranking positions of any public company for five years. What Is Insider Trading? The term "insider trading" has the connotation of being illegal. However, the term "insider trading" can also mean the perfectly legal buying and selling of stock by a company's corporate insiders. It is legal when these corporate insiders trade stock of their own company and report these trades to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). That way the insider trading is not kept a secret and anyone can find out a corporate insider's opinion of his or her company. Hence, it is illegal when a person bases their trade of stocks in a public company without letting the public know and it is also illegal to give someone information, a tip, so they can trade their stock.

Why Is Insider Trading Illegal? The SEC's job is to make sure that all investors are making decisions based on the same information. Insider trading can be illegal because it destroys this level playing field.

Punishments and Rewards Associated With Insider Trading Insider trading is one of the most common laws broken and according to the SEC website, there are almost 500 civil enforcement actions each year against individuals and companies breaking securities laws. The punishment for illegal insider trading depends on the situation. The person can be fined, banned from sitting on the executive or board of directors of a public company and even jailed.

The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 in the United States allows the Securities and Exchange Commission to give a person a reward "a bounty" to someone who gives the Commission information that results in a fine of insider trading.

Imclone Systems is a biopharmaceutical company that develops and commercializes a portfolio of targeted treatments designed to address the medical needs of patients with cancer. The company is focused on two strategies for treating cancer: growth factor blockers and angiogenesis inhibitors. Company's commercially available product, ERBITUX for use in combination with irinotecan in the treatment of patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-expressing, metastatic colorectal cancer who are refractory to irinotecan-based chemotherapy and for use as a single-agent in the treatment of patients with EGFR-expressing, metastatic colorectal cancer who are intolerant to irinotecan-based chemotherapy.




INDICTMENT AND PUBLIC FALL



In 2002, Stewart came under federal investigation for insider stock trading as a result of her suspicious sale of almost 4,000 shares of ImClone stocks on December 27, 2001 prior to a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announcement declaring that the promising cancer drug made by ImClone would not be considered for review leading to ImClone's stock price tumbled. Prosecutors for the Securities and Exchange Commission alleged that Stewart was acting on a tip from her stockbroker, Peter Bacanovic, who reported that ImClone CEO Sam Waksal, one of Stewart's close friends, dumped his stock in the company.



The original accusation began as an Associated Press story the evening of June 6, and another in the New York Times on June 7, 2002. The story was leaked or planted by "people close to a Congressional investigation" saying "Martha Stewart, a close friend of the former chief executive of ImClone Systems, sold all her shares in the biotechnology company a day or two before ImClone announced an unfavorable ruling by the Food and Drug Administration." This anonymous insinuation that Martha Stewart had been tipped-off by ImClone founder Sam Waksal appeared a week before Waksal was arrested and the House Energy and Commerce Committee held hearings on the matters.

The June 6 accusations of insider trading have now been officially rejected, yet magically transformed into the basis for Martha Stewart's indictment for securities fraud. She held 62.6 % of the Class A shares in Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia (MSLO) on June 6, and still holds 61.4 %. The government says she spent the rest of that month making "false and misleading statements" to prop up the price of her own stock.



As a result of the investigation and the intensifying scandal, Stewart relinquished her seat on the board of directors of the New York Stock Exchange in late 2002. On June 4, 2003, Stewart and Bacanovic were officially indicted by a federal grand jury on nine counts of securities fraud,obstruction of justice, and conspiracyserious criminal charges that carried prison sentences. Though vigorously denying the allegations and defending herself on her Web site and in a paid, full-page editorial in USA Today, Stewart stepped down from her position as chairman and CEO of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia on the day of her indictment.

Amid a media agitation, Stewart's trial began in a Manhattan courtroom on January 20, 2004 where she refused to testify, but maintained her innocence throughout the proceedings despite witness testimony as well as evidence of doctored documents suggesting foul play. Her prior experience as a stockbroker prevented the possibility of arguing that she was ignorant of trading regulations. On March 5, 2004, Stewart was convicted of four counts of obstruction of justice and lying to investigators. On July 16, 2004, Stewart was sentenced to five months in prison, followed by five months of house arrest. She remained free on bail pending an appeal.



The Martha Stewart Case Timeline

Below is a comprehensive timeline of happenings from the day Martha sold her ImClone stock to the present.


2001


Dec. 27: At 1:41 p.m. Martha returns a call from her broker's office at Merrill Lynch and authorizes the sale of nearly 4,000 shares of biotech drug maker ImClone Systems Inc. Two minutes later, the assistant broker to Peter Bacanovic, Douglas Faneuil, executes the sale.

Dec. 28: The Food and Drug Administration says it will not review ImClone's application for Erbitux, which the company sells as a promising cancer drug; however, disappointing news sends ImClone's shares plummeting. Martha's stock sale was worth $228,000, saving her a loss of $45, 673.

2002

Jan. 7: Martha's stock broker, Peter Bacanovic, and his assistant, Douglas Faneuil, are questioned by investigators regarding Martha's ImClone stock trade.

Feb. 4: Martha is questioned by the SEC regarding her ImClone stock trade.

April, 2002: Christopher Byron's unauthorized and unflattering biography of Martha called "Martha Inc. - The Incredible Story of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia Inc." is released to mixed reviews. The book, which portrays Martha as a devious and ill-tempered woman, soon becomes a bestseller. Martha later announces she will indefinitely postpone the release of her autobiography, "Martha - Really and Truly," which had been scheduled for release in the fall of 2002.

June 6: "Sources close to a congressional investigation" leak rumors that the House Energy and Commerce Committee, which is investigating ImClone trading, will probe Martha's stock sale.

June 7: The New York Times runs a front page story about the new investigation into Martha's stock trade and stock in Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia drops sharply.

June 12: Sam Waksal, the co-founder and former C.E.O. of ImClone, and a close friend of Martha, is arrested and accused of advising family members to sell their shares before the FDA announcement, and of trying to dump his own shares. Martha denies receiving "improper information" from him before selling her shares.

June 25: Martha's infamous cabbage-chopping interview with CBS This Morning host Jane Clayson causes a media feeding frenzy after Martha denies any wrongdoing in the case, saying she will be "exonerated of any ridiculousness" and adding that she'd like to simply focus on her salad. Martha subsequently cancels show's appearances.

July 8: Native New Yorker John Small launches SaveMartha.com in response to the inordinate amount of negative press about Martha and her case. The fan site has since logged over 20 million hits and has content contributors from all over North America.

July 24: Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia Inc. halves its third-quarter earnings forecast, acknowledging Martha's legal problems are taking a toll on business.

Aug. 3: Martha celebrates her 61st birthday at Skylands, her home on Mount Desert Island, Maine.

Aug. 7: Sam Waksal is indicted on charges of securities fraud.

Aug. 8: With news of Waksal's arrest, stock in MSO reaches an all-time low with shares worth only $6.29, down nearly 60% since June.

Aug. 14: ImClone Systems Inc. sues Sam Waksal to recover the $7 million in severance that was paid to him when he resigned as C.E.O. of the company in the fall of 2001.

Aug. 20: Martha delivers 1,050 pages worth of documents pertinent to the investigation to the House Energy and Commerce Committee, one hour before her 4:00 deadline.

Aug. 23: A New York law firm files a class action law suit against Martha Stewart together with the directors of her company, claiming they sold $79 million worth of shares before news of an insider-trading investigation caused the company's stock price to tumble.

Sept. 10: The House Committee asks the Justice Department to begin a criminal investigation into whether Martha knowingly lied to lawmakers. Her stock broker, Peter Bacanovic of Merrill Lynch and his assistant Douglas Faneuil are also implicated in the investigation.

Oct. 2: After initially telling the investigators that he supported Martha's and Peter's story, Douglas Faneuil pleads guilty to taking a payoff to keep quiet about an alleged insider stock trade and agrees to testify against Martha in exchange for a plea bargain. He is then absolved of any further prosecution.

Oct. 3: Martha voluntarily resigns from the board of the New York Stock Exchange. "I did not want the media attention currently surrounding me to distract from the important work of the NYSE and thus felt it was appropriate to resign," Martha said in a statement. NYSE Chairman and CEO, Dick Grasso, responded, "We are saddened to lose Martha Stewart…Our board will miss Ms. Stewart's counsel and insight."

Oct. 15: Sam Waksal pleads guilty to six counts including securities fraud, bank fraud, conspiracy to obstruct justice and perjury. He as well admits tipping his daughter to dump ImClone stock, but does not implicate Martha.

Oct. 22: Martha is served a Wells Notice by the SEC, recommending that civil fraud charges be brought against her for alleged insider trading.

Oct. 31: Stewart's media company reports a 42 percent drop in third-quarter profits with declining ad sales in the company's flagship magazine, Martha Stewart Living.

December: Martha cancels her annual Christmas TV special for the first time, a fter months of declining TV ratings,

2003

March 4, 2003: Her company reports its first-ever quarterly loss amid fallout from the investigation. Ad sales in Martha Stewart Living magazine are down 28% from the previous year.

April 30: Her company reports more losses, which are blamed on the continued insider-trading investigation, and forecasts additional losses.

May 19: Cybill Shepherd stars as Martha Stewart in the NBC film adaptation of Byron's book "Martha Inc." The film, which portrays Martha as a shrewd and manipulative woman, becomes the #1 TV movie of 2003 to date. It re-airs two weeks later.

June 3: Omnimedia says federal prosecutors are seeking a criminal indictment against Martha "in the near future."

June 4: The U.S. Federal Government lays criminal charges against Martha and her stock broker, Peter Bacanovic. There are nine charges between them. Martha's charges include 2 counts of making false statements, securities fraud, conspiracy and obstruction of justice. Peter's charges include perjury, conspiracy and obstruction. Ironically, there is no criminal charge of insider trading, which was the basis of the initial investigation. If she is found guilty on all charges, Martha faces a maximum sentence of 30 years in prison and a $2 million fine.

June 4: U.S. Attorney James B. Comey holds a large press conference telling reporters, "This case is about lying."

June 4: The SEC files civil charges against Martha and Peter, seeking an order requiring the duo to disgorge the losses she avoided through her allegedly unlawful trading, plus civil monetary charges.

June 5: Martha voluntarily resigns as Chairman and C.E.O. of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia Inc. "I love this company, its people and everything it stands for. I am stepping aside as Chairman and C.E.O. because it is the right thing to do," Martha says in a statement. Company president Sharon Patrick steps in as acting C.E.O. and company shareholder Jeffrey Ubben, an investment banker, is the acting Chairman. Martha is named Chief Creative Director of the company.

June 5: Since June of 2002, when the investigation was first made public, stock in MSO dropped from $19.23 a share to a little over $9 a share, a decline of 51% over a one-year period. Martha, in turn, loses nearly half her net worth, approximately $400 million, according to Martha.

June 5: At a cost of $79,000, Martha takes out a full-page ad in USA Today proclaiming her innocence: "After more than a year, the government has decided to bring charges against me for matters that are personal and entirely unrelated to the business of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. I want you all to know that I am innocent - and that I will fight to clear my name."

June 5: Martha launches MarthaTalks.com, a website that espouses her innocence with letters written by Martha, messages from her attorneys, supportive notes from readers and articles by various media that defend her case. In two weeks the site registers 10 million hits with 55,000 letters of encouragement for Martha.

June 10: Sam Waksal is sentenced to 7 years in a federal prison and must pay $4 million in fines and back taxes.

June 19: After a brief hearing, and a court appearance by Martha and Peter, January 12, 2004, is set as the trial date for their case.

July 5: U.S. Attorney James Comey hires Karen Patton Seymour as lead prosecutor in the case against Martha and Peter. The judge in the case is Her Honorable Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum.

July 7: Martha hires PR guru Howard Rubenstein to help enhance her seriously tarnished image. Rubenstein's former clients have included Michael Jackson, Donald Trump, Leona Helmsley and George Steinbrenner.

July 21: Martha's lawyers appear in court and put forth motions urging the court to launch an investigation into the source of leaks about Martha's case to the press before the facts had been properly assessed. The defense attorneys suggest that the U.S. Attorney's Office be investigated, as well as the FBI, the SEC and the Justice Department.

July 23: Sam Waksal begins his 7 year sentence at Schuylkill Federal Correctional Institute in Minersville, Pa.


Aug. 3: Martha turns 62 and celebrates in Maine on Picnic Boat with a small group of friends and family.

Aug. 7: Martha Stewart Living magazine reports a 42.2% decline in ad pages and a 39.9% drop in ad revenues in its July issue. That's even worse than the magazine's year-to-date declines of 30.6% and 26.8%, respectively.

Sep. 8: Martha, who appears jubilant and energetic, begins a week-long promotional tour of Canada where her Everyday brand of merchandise is debuting at Sears. The brand is expected to generate over $300 million annually for Sears Canada.

Sep. 9: Citing a lack of resources and evidence, Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum denies the request made by Martha's attorney's to investigate the SEC, the FBI, the U.S. District Attorney's Office and the Justice Department regarding suspicious leaks to the press about Martha's case before charges had been made public.

Sep. 15: Because of falling TV ratings, six CBS affiliate stations move the Martha Stewart Living program from the coveted 9 a.m. time slot to a 2 a.m. timeslot, significantly reducing the number of Martha's viewers. Replacing Martha Stewart Living is a cooking show called "Living it Up! With Ali and Jack." The new show subsequently bombs with embarrassing ratings.

Sep 28: Despite dogged controversy surrounding her upcoming trial, Martha is inducted into the Nutley, New Jersey Hall of Fame along with 8 other inductees.


Oct. 5: An interview with Sam Waksal airs on "60 Minutes," a news digest program on CBS. Waksal is quoted as saying, "I got the impression that if they (the investigators) could have Martha they would be unbelievably happy campers…"

Oct. 6: Martha's lawyers file a 122-page motion seeking to have two of the more serious charges against her dropped, saying they have no legal validity: obstruction of justice and securities fraud.

Oct. 6: Peter Bacanovic, Martha's former Merrill Lynch stock broker who has been simultaneously charged in the ImClone case, puts forth a request to be tried separately from Martha.

Oct. 9: U.S. Federal Judge John Sprizzo calls the prosecution's case "weak" and questions why Attorney General James B. Comey conducted his investigation so publicly. In a huge win, Martha's attorneys are granted the opportunity to interview up to 14 key witnesses before they are called to testify during the trail in January. One interviewee will be Douglas Faneuil, the prosecution's star witness who has already admitted to lying to investigators and has changed testimony several times.

Nov. 05: Prosecutors file a 105-page memorandum countering the defense's claims that two of the counts against Martha should be dropped, saying she gave a "forceful, detailed and false explanation" about her actions. The prosecution asks the judge not to drop the charges.

Nov. 07: Martha is interviewed by Barbara Walters on ABC's "20/20" in the first and only in-depth television interview about the effects of her impending trial after the scandal broke almost 18 months ago: "It hurts a lot, Barbara. I'm hurting."November 7. The show is one of 20/20s highest rated of the year.

Nov. 13: Shareholders in MSO stock drop their law suit against several Omnimedia staffers, including President and CEO Sharon Patrick and Vice President Gael Towey.

Nov. 13: Judge John Sprizzo sets a Dec. 5 hearing to decide if he will allow Martha Stewart's attorneys a chance at advance questioning of two Securities and Exchange lawyers who are to be key witnesses at her upcoming criminal trial. The judge may also compel Douglas Faneuil to submit to the defense's pre-trial questions.

Nov. 18: Oral arguments begin. The defense argues that the securities fraud charge and the obstruction of justice charge be dropped. Prosecutors argue Martha knowingly and forcefully lied to investigators, and told stockholders she was innocent in order to prop up her company's stock.

December 15: Prosecutors deliver names of unnamed co-conspirators to Martha Stewart's attorneys.

December 22: Martha appears on Larry King Live, where her mother also makes an appearance to show support for her daughter. Martha says this is "the saddest Christmas ever" as she prepares for the trial.

2004

January 6: Jury selection process begins with distribution of jury questionnaires.

January 20: Trial scheduled to begin with several days of jury selection. The trial is projected to last for six weeks.

Impact on American Business and Culture


Martha Stewart built a media domain and a world-class brand through her superior aesthetic sense and ability in presenting herself as a living embodiment of simple elegance. During the 1980s and 1990s, her quick tips for fine cooking and better decorating appealed to many American women traditional, professional, and even liberated women who sought to emulate Stewart's refurbished version of modern homemaking. Instructing her audiences from the staged comfort of her renovated colonial home and beautifully maintained gardens, Stewart showed how sophisticated cuisine and understated home luxury were not the exclusive domain of upper-class New Englanders. but were accessible to anyone willing to heed her recommendations. Stewart's judicious taste was encapsulated in her trademark epithet "It's a good thing."

A Part of Stewart's business success can be attributed to her realization that she was selling not only her products but also her information. Her publications and television series were popular because the information Stewart provided were perceived as consistently reliable as well as useful by her audience. Moreover, she mesmerized an idealized home life that demonstrated how time-strapped, and even modern working women could have it all. In contrast to such staid predecessors as Betty Crocker and Julia Child, Stewart represented a thoroughly modern womansmart, ambitious, and attractive whose judgments on food, home decor, and style became the unofficial equivalent of the Good Housekeeping seal of approval. By distilling this authority into a powerful brand, Stewart was able to expand into new product lines from paint to bedding to stationary on the strength of her name and endorsement all by herself.

Despite her remarkable business accomplishments and rise as a major player in the male-dominated media industry, Stewart was often the subject of scorn and ridicule. She was mocked for her sickly-sweet graciousness and arrogant explanations of difficult recipes and projects that she performed with effortless perfection. She was also accused in numerous published accounts of displaying a cruel temper and blatant selfishness. It is worth noting, however, that criticism of Stewart's aggressive personality and tendency to micromanage her business suggested a double standard, as these same traits were often deemed praiseworthy in male executives. Stewart's complex identity as a business leader and celebrity had serious implications for Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia in the wake of her conviction. Because of Stewart's status as the irreplaceable main figure of the company, the fate of her media enterprises together with her own reputation as a path breaking entrepreneur rested heavily upon the continuance of her popularity in the face of the extremely fickle audience.


CURRENT PROJECTS

Following Martha's release in March 2005 from prison , she launched a highly publicized comeback, and was once again involved in Martha Stewart Living. Offerings of her company's Martha Stewart Everyday line at Kmart were expanded to include a new line of ready-made home furnishings, and its mass market interior paint line became available at larger Sears stores. However, the most heavily promoted aspect of her comeback was television. Stewart returned to daytime television with The Martha Stewart Show and appeared in an adapted version of The Apprentice called The Apprentice: Martha Stewart. Both shows premiered in September 2005, and both were produced by Mark Burnett. The Martha Stewart Show is currently in its fourth season.

Her prime time Apprentice spin-off received poor ratings, which some attribute to popular dislike for the opportunistic tone of the network's massive promotional campaign and to NBC's scheduling the show up against the hit drama Lost. Thus, The Apprentice: Martha Stewart wasn't renewed for a second season.

In October 2005, Stewart also released a new book called The Martha Rules on starting and managing a new business, and a month later her company released Martha Stewart Baking Handbook. In October 2006, Martha Stewart's Homekeeping Handbook, a reference book about looking after your house, was published by Clarkson Potter. She also became a regular contributor of cooking, gardening, and crafts segments on NBC's Today show. Stewart's daily talk show was nominated in six categories for the 33rd Annual Daytime Emmy Awards in 2006 which includes Best Host and Best Show. The Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia launched a line of houses that carry her name to be built by KB Home initially in Cary, North Carolina and in different other locations nationwide. The first homes, which were inspired by Stewart's homes in New York and Mount Desert Island in Maine, were completed in early 2006. Ultimately, 650 homes are planned with prices from low $200,000 to mid-$400,000s. A line of paper-based crafts for EK Success is also in development. In September 2007, she launched an upscale line of home wares for Macy's, which set as the largest brand launch in Macy's history. Stewart has said that she has designed more than 2,000 items exclusively for Macy's , appearing in commercials for the line, which includes bath s, bedding,dinnerware s, and cookwares .

In addition to television and merchandising, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia launched a 24-hour satellite radio channel with Sirius in November 2005, on which Stewart currently hosts a weekly call-in show. Stewart has also encouraged her viewers to use the Wikipedia on her program during a segment on pomegranates in order for them to learn more about that fruit's symbolism in Jewish tradition. In addition, she has mentioned to make a Martha Stewart online encyclopedia, Marthapedia.com.

Stewart also made a special appearance on the serio-comic series Ugly Betty in the November 16, 2006, episode entitled "Four Thanksgivings and a Funeral", in which she gave her friend Wilhelmina Slater, played by Vanessa Williams, tips on how to prepare a turkey. Justin Suarez, played by Mark Indelicato, is actually a fan of Stewart.

In July of 2006, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia announced a multi-year agreement with FLOR, Inc.- the eco-friendly manufacturer of high-style modular floor coverings, to manufacture and market a new line of Martha Stewart-branded carpet tiles. The Martha Stewart Floor Designs by FLOR line debuted in 2007 with its distinctive design and color palette associated with the Martha Stewart brand. The line's price ranges from $12.99 to $16.99 per tile and includes specially-designed rug creations reflecting the Martha Stewart brand. The Martha Stewart Floor Designs by FLOR products are available through FLOR.com, the FLOR catalog, and through its selected retailers. The agreement with FLOR was part of the Martha Stewart organization's growing home furnishings program that includes a wide range of products from furniture with Bernhardt, wall color with Lowe's, up to floor coverings with FLOR.

On September 14, 2007, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia announced that it inked a partnership with E & J Gallo Winery to produce a wine brand with label "Martha Stewart Vintage" (for sale in 6 cities, January, at $15). There were 15,000 cases to be sold 2006 which include Sonoma County Chardonnay, 2005 Sonoma County Cabernet Sauvignon and 2006 Sonoma County Merlot for Atlanta, Boston, Charlotte, N.C., Denver, Phoenix, and Portland, Oregon. Martha Stewart as well signed a contract with Costco Wholesale Corp. offering frozen and fresh food label - Kirkland Signature.

In July 2008, Craft items under the names "Martha Stewart Celebrate" and "Martha Stewart Create" , which are the two divisions of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, premiered in Wal-Mart stores. The deal came about in part because of the closing of more than 600 K-Mart stores in the United States.