The Nile River

Last year, about this time, my partner and I were kicking up our heels in Monte Carlo waiting for something interesting to happen. We had climbed Mount Kilimanjaro, canoed down the Amazon and gone skydiving with famous people too. Our hotel was a grand affair with crystal chandeliers, high ceilings and marble floors, but by now we had grown weary of the local restaurants and endless queues of people pirouetting on the beach in swimsuits. The Grand Prix had come and gone with screaming crowds and high-pitched engines. I was grateful when the love of my love of life returned from shopping, with a parcel in a bag.

"What that," I asked. In return I got a mischievous grin.

"Oh nothing, was their answer. Just something lighthearted for a little fun."

"I'm getting too old for that ..."I said.

"Don't worry. It's just a game for bored people. You'll have to wait to find out more."
I was to discover later that same day that we had acquired the Source of the Nile - a game about the exploration of Africa. But it's not only about finding the source of that great river though, but also about exploring the entire region too. I normally shun board games, because I find their rules extremely limiting. However in this case it is an open-ended system. This means that within the rules you can do almost anything you like. Now that sounds like fun to me!
I entered into fantasy. So the two of us were going to send explorers into Africa on a series of expeditions. And afterwards we would go to Europe to publish our discoveries and earn bonus points. What fun! What's more, if one of us didn't complete the journey, we'd just send more explorers off to complete our search. The winner of us would be the first one to reach an agreed number of victory points - or who was ahead at the agreed point in time. The goal was to keep going, while there is still some wilderness left to explore, until the whole map had been colored in with knowledge.

"The best part of all," my beloved a dded , " is that there is no limit to the number of players who can join in the fun." "Oh great," I said. "Let's invite that sweet young waitress to join us in the morning."
"I have an even better idea. Why not go on a genuine expedition down the Nile, and play the game with perfect strangers, at least in our own minds?'
I sat down to study the intriguing game in detail. It targeted players in the 12+ age bracket, which is about right for me when I'm settled into gin and tonic for the afternoon. It takes about fifteen minutes to set up, with a recommended play time of two hours and medium random levels (don't ask, I have no idea what that means). It was first released by Ross Wesley & David Maker Boardgames in 1977, although I noticed ours was published by Avalon Hill a few years later.

"Where did you get this thing?" I demanded. "It's positively ancient!"

"But still new," friend pointed out. "I found it at Piero Corsini, an old master art collector and dealer also known as Maison d'Art. The shop's catalog includes collections of rare and precious artworks. It offers a large number of antique items and collectibles, including a spectacular assortment of furnishings which date back to the 14th and 15th centuries. I couldn't afford anything else, so I decided the game was worth having."

I found myself wondering who our future playing companions might be, as we traveled down through enigmatic Egypt along the Nile. A Mata Hari in an alluring dress that concealed a razor-sharp scimitar, or an Omar Sharif in long cloak and mustache with potions that could drive me crazy? Who knows what else could happen on a journey like that. I shivered in anticipation.

"I think you're getting carried away," my partner - always the telepathic one - said. "The game's set in the nineteenth century, when such things simply didn't happen. The object is not to make love to strangers, but to explore the heart of Africa, make important discoveries, and report these back to other scientists in Europe.
"Besides, you'll be far to busy outfitting your expeditions to fantasize like that. You'll need to select a mode of travel, be it by canoe, on camel or foot. When the game starts, the map of the interior of Africa will blank. As we enter each unexplored hex (I let that bewitching thought pass) we'll draw a card to determine the terrain, and the events that befall our gallant explorers. Armed with their experiences we'll use crayons to draw the terrain on the map as we discover it. In a sense, we'll be creating our own geographic fantasia." "That sounds exciting," I replied. "So our explorers will confront dangers like starvation, disease, river cataracts and hostile natives. How bizarre!The game sounds highly lethal to our explorers, but then we can always create a new set who re-enter our game at the coastal port we choose." "That's right. We'll also be choosing the genre of explorers we'll appoint, and the amount of points we gain for their particular discoveries too. These will vary according to the type of explorer. For instance:
Zoologists get points for discovering animals. Botanists get points for discovering exotic plants. Missionaries get more points when dealing with natives. Geologists gain points for minerals. Doctors gain points for medicinal items. Journalists gain points for almost any encounter, even with other players. Ethnologists gain points for discovering native villages" "Such a shame," I said. "That we have to compete like this. But I suppose it does add a sparkle to our relationship. For now though, come and relax in my arms, and watch a bit of television for variety."
Later, I fell asleep and dreamed. I was on a Nile River boat with lanteen sails and swarthy crewmen. They paddled us through the water as I lay back on silken cushions, with the loveliest person I ever imagined caressing me so sweetly.


I glanced around. I was on a Felucca, on other words a traditional wooden sailing boat used in the protected waters of the Red Sea, the Eastern Mediterranean including Malta - and particularly along the Nile in Egypt, Sudan, and also in Iraq. Its rig consists of one or two triangular lateen sails. It can accommodate ten passengers, and the crew consists of two or three people often including a young boy. Despite being made obsolete by motorboats and ferries, Feluccas are still in active use as a means of local transport in cities like Aswan or Luxor. They are especially popular among tourists, who can enjoy a quieter and calmer mode of travel, as they glide past the enigmatic Pyramids and Sphinx.
A voice I did not recognize began to speak in sonorous tones ...

"The River Nile on which we travel," the voice began "is principally sourced by two great rivers - the Blue Nile and the White. Although the Blue Nile flows fewer miles than her milky colored sister, her darker waters carry more of the silt that gives life to Egypt's dry sand dunes, and turns them into fertile plains with floods.

" The Blue Nile originates at Lake Tana in Ethiopia, the land of mysterious Coptic churches carved underground. The upper reaches of the river are called Abba. These waters are considered holy by many local saints, who believe them to be the River Gihon in the Book of Genesis. This flowed from the Garden of Eden itself out to the world beyond.

"The Blue Nile stretches for 1,450 kilometers, of which the first 800 kilometers lie within Ethiopia itself. There, the river flows generally south from its source in Lake Tana, and then westward across Ethiopia and northwest into Sudan. Within thirty kilometers of its source the river enters a tremendous gorge about four-hundred kilometers long, where it thunders over cataracts between more placid, serpentine ponds. This canyon is a tremendous obstacle for travel and communication between north Ethiopia and the south. In fact, is is comparable in size to the mighty Grand Canyon at Colorado. The power of the Blue Nile is best experienced at Tis Issat Falls , which are forty-five meters high, and located about 40 kilometers downstream of the source."

Now that, I thought, could be the perfect place to play our board game. I imagined the two of us perched on a ledge above the waterfall, sending our gallant explorers out to find the very things that we were watching. There would be little point in employing zoologists or botanists though, for the land was sterile and occupied by wandering Bedouin tribes. In fact, I shouldn't suppose they'd welcome missionaries either, so I'd likely settle for an ethnologist to understand their cultures instead.

I half hoped that an Ethiopian priest might join us for a round our The Source of the Nile board game. In more formal and regular rituals, these priests communicate on behalf of their communities, and only they may enter the inner sanctums of the usually circular or octagonal churches where their church's patron saint is housed. On important religious holidays, this image is carried on the head of priests and escorted in processions outside the churches. Only those parishioners who feel pure, have fasted regularly, and have generally conducted themselves properly may enter them to receive communion. At many services, most parish members remain in the shadows, where debteras sing hymns and dance. A person like that would surely know the best explorers to send out, I mused.
"There are several feeder streams that flow into Lake Tana" the dreamlike voice continued. However the sacred source of the river is generally thought to be a small spring at Gish Abbai at an altitude of approximately 2,744 meters above the ocean's surface. I was sorry to have missed this the last time we visited. This is because the Lesser Abay flows north into Lake Tana. In a way, I suppose this is a little like water flowing uphill in a dream.
"Other features of Lake Tana include - in clockwise order from Gorgora - the Magech, the Northern Gumara, the Reb, the Southern Gumara and the Kilte. However the Blue Nile only becomes known as such, after it plunges over the Tis Issat Falls, and then loops across Northwestern Ethiopia through a series of deep valleys and canyons into Sudan. "There are numerous tributaries flowing into the river between Lake Tana and the Sudanese border. Those on its left bank, in downstream order, include the Wanqa River, the Bashilo River, the Walaqa River, the Wanchet River, the Jamma River, the Muger River, the Guder River, the Agwel River, the Nedi River, the Didessa River and the Dabus River. Those on the right side, also in downstream order, include the Handassa, Tul, Abaya, Sade, Tammi, Cha, Shita, Suha, Muga , Gulla River , Temcha , Bachat, Katlan, Jiba, Chamoga, Weter and the Beles. "After gliding past Er Roseires through Sudan, and receiving the contribution of the Dinder River, the Blue Nile joins the White Nile at Khartoum and - as the River Nile proper - flows through Egypt into the Mediterranean Sea at Alexandria. The Blue Nile is something of a misnomer, for it turns almost black in flood-times instead because the water current is so high. The confusion comes from the fact that the word is the same for black and blue in the indigenous Sudanese tongue. "The distance from its source to its confluence with the Mediterranean Sea is variously reported as 1,460 and 1,600 kilometers depending on your point of view. The uncertainty over its length might partially result from the fact that it flows through virtually impenetrable gorges cut into the Ethiopian Highlands to a depth of some 1,500 meters. This is comparable to the vastness of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River in the United States." That was quite a mouthful to absorb. In fact I felt saturated with all the information. The voice persisted though, as the unknown hand gently stroked my brow and bade me to be still and listen.
"The White Nile - the other tributary to the River Nile itself - is, strictly speaking the river formed at Lake No at the confluence of the Bahr al Jabal and Bahr el Ghazal rivers. In the wider sense though, the names refers to the approximately 3,700 kilometers of rivers draining from Lake Victoria into the White Nile proper. It may also - depending on the opinion of the speaker - refer to the headwaters of Lake Victoria that join the Blue Nile at Khartoum. The 19th century search by Europeans for the source of the River Nile was mainly focused on the White Nile, which disappeared into the depths of what was then called Darkest Africa. Of course the indigenous tribes already had the answer. Discovering the White Nile source epitomized Western penetration of unknown jungles to bring knowledge to ignorant savages . This is why the likes of Livingstone seldom bothered to ask directions." I was beginning to understand the significance of the board game my friend had bought in Monte Carlo. I imagined what it would be like to be playing Source of the Nile with Livingstone himself, when Stanley wandered by. Would we complete the game while we sipped the exotic nectar that the local natives brewed from local jungle fruit, or would my companion rise immediately, and extend a hand to the one uttering those immortal words of "Doctor Livingstone, I presume."

How bizarre is that? The only two Europeans for a thousand miles in any direction meet in the heart of the African jungle. And the one waits to be introduced to the other? An interesting question while I digress. Could the source of a river be the lake it flows from, or the rivers that feed that lake's headwaters. I was to learn that the latter was the case.
"The Kagera River," the voice continued in my dream, "which flows into Lake Victoria near the Tanzanian town of Bukoba, is the longest feeder river for Lake Victoria. However sources do not agree on which is the longest tributary of the Kagera itself, and hence the most distant source of the White Nile. Some say it is the Ruvyironza, which emerges in Bururi Province, or the Nyabarongo , which flows from Nyungwe Forest in Rwanda. In any case, these two feeder rivers meet near Rusumo Falls on the Rwanda-Tanzanian border - where a quarter million Rwandan refugees crossed the bridge into Ngara, Tanzania in one single day - and in what the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees called " the largest and fastest refugee exodus in modern time s". "The river flowing out from Lake Victoria is known as the Victoria Nile, to be precise from the point just outside Jinja where a monument marks the spot. It feeds two hydro-power stations before it cascades down Bujagali Falls. From there, it flows north and west through Uganda, feeding into Lake Kyoga in the center of that country, and then out again towards the west.


"At Karuma Falls the river sweeps onward beneath Karuma Bridge at the south-east corner of Murchison Falls National Park. Just before entering Lake Albert (opposite the Blue Mountains in the Democratic Republic of the Congo) it squeezes through a canyon seven meters wide at Murchison Falls, as it enters the west branch of the East African Rift. It leaves Lake Albert - now unsurprisingly known as the Albert Nile - separating the Western Nile sub-region from the rest of Uganda in the process. Bridges are few here. A ferry connects the roads between Adjumani and Moyo. Navigation of the river is otherwise the task of small boats and canoes. "It continues north to Nimule, where it enters South Sudan called River of the Mountain , or Bahr al Jabal in the local vernacular. There, it winds through rapids before entering the Sudanese plain and the vast swamplands of the Sudd. Eventually, it finds its way through to Lake No, where it merges with Bahr el Ghazal to finally officially form the White Nile.
"From there, the river passes through the City of Juba, the capital of South Sudan and the southernmost navigable point on the Nile river system. It soon merges with the larger Blue Nile at Khartoum, the capital of Sudan, to become the River Nile at last, and head through Egypt to the ocean." While these days there is general agreement regarding the twin sources of the River Nile, this was the cause of considerable acrimony in Victorian Times . One participant in the debate was John Hanning Speke, an officer in the British Indian Army born in 1827 , and who made three exploratory expeditions to discover the answer the local inhabitants already knew.

I often wonder what the native people made of those white strangers who arrived dressed in solar hats and Egyptian suits. Did they appear as bizarre to them, as an extra-terrestrial being might seem to me? I'd love to know. I fear I likely never shall. A further query I have is how well they would have performed when playing the Source of the Nile board game. They were hard-nosed explorers. Would they share the action with ethnologists, journalists and missionaries? I suppose these things are locked into the mists of time too.

The Victorian explorer John Hanning Speke was born at Orleigh Court, Buckland Brewer near Bideford, North Devon on 4th May 1827 . In 1844, he was commissioned into the British army and posted to India, where he served under Sir Colin Campbell during the First Anglo-Sikh War. Speke spent his leave exploring the Himalayan Mountains and Mount Everest, and even once crossed into Tibet. No doubt this inspired him to spend a lifetime exploring other unfamiliar places.


In 1854 at age twenty-seven Speke made his first voyage to Africa, joining in an expedition to Somalia led by one Richard Burton who was already quite well-known and six years older. The latter was a British geographer, explorer , translator , writer, soldier, orientalist, cartographer , ethnologist , spy , linguist, poet, fencer and diplomat. He was well-known for his travels to Asia, Africa and the Americas, as well as his extraordinary knowledge of different languages and cultures. It's said he spoke twenty-nine European, Asian and African languages, which could be something of a record.
Their expedition did not go well. The party was attacked and both Burton and Speke were badly wounded. Speke was captured and stabbed several times with spears before he was able to free himself and escape. Burton escaped with a javelin impaling both his cheeks. Speke returned to England to recover, and then served in the Crimean War with distinction.

In 1856, Speke and Burton decided to revisit East Africa to find the Great Lakes, which they hoped would lead their expedition to the source of the Nile itself. The journey was extremely strenuous. Both men fell ill from a variety of tropical diseases. Speke became temporarily deaf after a beetle crawled into his ear, and he tried to remove it with a knife. He also later went temporarily blind. Following a hard journey, Speke and Burton became the first Europeans to reach Lake Tanganyika - although Speke, being still partly blind at this point, could not clearly see the lake.
The men heard tales of a second lake in the area. With Burton now too ill to make the journey, Speke went on alone and found the lake, which he christened Lake Victoria in honor of the British Queen. It was this lake that eventually proved to be a clue to the origin of the White Nile. However by then much of the expedition's scientific equipment had been lost, and so vital questions about the height and extent of the lake could not be answered. Speke returned to England before Burton could recover. On 8 May 1859 he claimed in a speech to the Royal Geographical Society that he had discovered the source of the Nile. This caused a rift between him and Burton, who had expected to make a joint announcement. A further rift occurred when Speke was chosen to lead a subsequent expedition instead of Burton. They did however present joint papers to the Royal Geographical Society on 13 June 1859, regarding their second expedition. The next year, Speke set off for Uganda with a fresh exploring companion named James Augustus Grant. Both were now aged thirty-three. After they arrived there, Grant went north, while Speke continued on his journey towards the west. After reaching Lake Victoria on 28th July 1862, he traveled around it until he found a river he assumed to be the White Nile flowing out of it, and stumbled over the Ripon Falls. He sailed down the river to be reunited with Grant. When he reached Khartoum, he sent a celebrated telegram to London saying "The Nile is settled". Case closed, or so he thought. Burton did not agree with Speke. He claimed that since Speke had not followed the waters from the place where they flowed out of Lake Victoria to Gondokoro, it was not proven that they were in fact the White Nile. The two men were due to argue this out before the Geographical Section of the British Association in Bath on 18 September 1864. However Speke died that same morning from a self-inflicted gunshot wound, while hunting deer at Neston Park in Wiltshire. An inquest concluded that his death was accidental, although the thought of suicide has appealed to others. Bearing in mind however, that the fatal wound was just below Speke's armpit, this seems unlikely. Speke was buried in Dowlish Wake - the ancestral home of the Speke family in Somerset. So we will likely never know the truth of the conundrum, and whether he discovered the origin of the River Nile, or not for sure.
After my dear friend and I were reunited in Northern Ethiopia, we began a 4,900 kilometer journey from the source of the Blue Nile to the Mediterranean Sea. Ours was a trip of remarkable color and contrast. We traveled from the lush green mountainous regions of Northern Ethiopia and past the dry grasslands of Sudan, before curving lazily through the Egyptian desert, past its fertile Nile Delta and on out to the sea. Every evening we lay on the deck of our Felucca sailing craft with lanteen sails flapping idly overhead, as we sought some respite from the day's heat. After the night breezes came, we'd light a lantern and play The Source of the Nile until dawn. The captain of our little craft Mohammed was a swarthy fellow of few words. However sometimes he joined us for a game or two with the ship's mate. It took some time (and a few gin and tonics I may add) to convince him of the merits of discovering places he had already visited before.
Ethiopia, where our adventure began, is an entirely landlocked nation with a rich and colorful history dating back more than 3,000 years. Legends of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, of the Ark of the Covenant and of the Axumite Kingdom abound, and its history is a woven tapestry of mystery and intrigue. Today, it is a melting pot of diverse cultures practicing different religions and customs. Curiously, it remains the only African country never to have been colonized by a European nation. We set off from Little Abbai - the mountain stream that is the unassuming sacred source of the mighty Blue Nile. It soon joins the Blue Nile's hydrological source Lake Tana, where our vessel wove its way amongst a scattering of islands. Many of these were the sites of 15th Century monasteries, that were decorated with dazzling religious murals.
Once past the cascading spectacle of the Blue Nile Falls - or Tis Isat as the locals call it - we transferred to rafts for an adrenalin thrill amidst the roaring rapids of the breathtaking Blue Nile Gorge. Along the way we noticed an abundance of wildlife on cliffs said to be a mile high. This included monkeys, mountain cats and a varied assortment of bird life. A myriad of tribes such as the Gumuz, Mande, Berta, Borano and Welo people also make the Gorge their home, many of whom have seldom glimpsed a white face. After that, the river became more peaceful. We followed sweeping flows through the foothills of the Gojam Mountains past small villages of cone-shaped huts. These settlements are free of modern communications, and so life there has remained unchanged since time immemorial. The graceful women still fetch clean water in their gouras - empty rinds of giant fruit - while the men still hunt leopards with their spears. Ah! What a paradise unspoiled. What a vision of the Garden of Eden as it may once have been!
After we transferred to a second Felucca in calmer water, the River's path continued on into the Sudan, where people have lived along the Nile for more than nine-thousand years in fortified mud-brick villages along the banks. The population comprises over six hundred different ethnic groups speaking more than four hundred languages and dialects. Sudan is the largest country in Africa, and is dominated by the Nile and her many tributaries. We trans-shipped again, this time to kayaks, to thread our way through Dinder National Park. This is among the largest African national parks and hosts an exceptional diversity of wildlife including antelope, lion, ostrich, wart hog and numerous bird species. Elephants and giraffes have also been seen roaming the grassland reserve. The flow of the Blue Nile is impeded at the Roseires Dam, which is the first of many obstacles we would encounter on our trip towards to the sea. It comprises a concrete buttress dam one kilometer wide with a maximum height of sixty eight meters, and buttressed by earth dams on either side between four and eight kilometers long. The dam was finished in 1966, trapping 290 square meters of water originally intended for irrigation purposes. A 280-megawatt hydro-generator was installed in 1971. The wall-heightening project now underway should be complete in 2013. After that, we glided into Khartoum, just before the Blue Nile and the White Nile rendezvous to become one great mighty river. Khartoum is Sudan's bustling capital, and stands at the furthest point upstream that Speke and Burton would have dared to journey, in their search for the true source of the River Nile. The location where the two Niles meet is known as "al-Mogran", meaning the Confluence. From this point, the merged River Nile continues to flow north towards Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea. Khartoum is a tripartite metropolis with an estimated overall population of over five million people consisting of Khartoum proper, and linked by bridges to Khartoum North (al-Khart큰m Bahr카) and Omdurman (Umm Durm훮n) to the west.

The origin of the word Khartoum is unclear. One theory is that it derives from the Arabic kart큰m - meaning 'end of an elephant's trunk' and likely referring to the narrow strip of land extending between the Blue and White Nile rivers. Explorer James August Grant who reached Khartoum in 1863 with Captain Speke's expedition, thought that the derivation might be based on the Arabic word qurtum (Safflower Carthamus Tinctorius), which was cultivated extensively in Egypt for oil in cooking fires. We chose to end our journey at Khartoum, because six cataracts and two deep bends lay before us as the River Nile wended her way past narrow strips of fertile farmland wedged between the Libyan and the Nubian deserts. This place is home to some of the most significant and largely undiscovered ancient temples of the Pharaohs - opportunities that will prime the imaginations of archaeologists yet to come. Herodotus, an ancient Greek historian once described the land of Egypt as the Gift of the Nile . Surely an apt description that captures her serenity and allure. Since the beginning of history the Nile has been the lifeblood of Egypt's political, religious, economic and social life, and this continues to this very day. Because hardly any rain falls in Egypt the nation is almost wholly dependent on the Nile for water. No wonder nearly ninety per cent of the population lives along her nourishing banks. Had we continued on the journey in our kayaks, we would have seen a multitude of awe-inspiring monuments left by pharaohs, not to mention the landmarks bequeathed by Greeks, Romans, early Christians and Muslims. These are testaments to the extraordinary history of Egypt and the River Nile, that will stand forever with proper preservation. However we chose to hire a car instead, because this was the only way to reach the ancient sites directly. As we drove past nearby river banks, we saw farmers using the self-same archaic tools and techniques as did their ancestors. In the cities too, primitive mud brick villages still have their place between towering glass buildings and vast shopping malls. What an experience this was for us. Two city dwellers who added to our adventures by sailing down the White Nile from north Ethiopia to Khartoum. Along the way we saw so many famous sites, and met so many fascinating people that I should never be able to complete my story if I mentioned them all. Of all the things that I would take with me again in addition to my beloved companion, our Source of the Nile board game would be at the top of my list - for it kept us happy and acted as a magnet for so many interesting new friends we met along the way.

And what did I make of North Africa and its peoples. Did I envy them their life's simplicities, or pity their poverty? My thoughts are still mixed. Perhaps it would be better if the likes of Livingstone, Stanley, Speke, Burton, and Grant among many others had never visited them, and left those ancient people without the alleged benefits of so-called civilization.

