Culpeper National Cemetery

Tragic Memories of War

War is a often a tragically unfortunate affair in which older men seduce young men into believing that the "enemy" is inhuman and deserving to be killed. At other times, it may be argued that their cause is possibly unjust. However the principles remain the same. Older men cause provocations and declare wars. Younger men - the flower of their respective countries and still reverberating with the joy and beauty of youth - are called on to die for them, in order to finally achieve the peace that inevitably follows.

I am a veteran with military experience myself, and I can still remember the constant brainwashing to which we were relentlessly exposed, until we reached the point where we truly believed that we were God's own people, and that the enemy (who lived with us in the same country) were inhuman. I am not proud of the fact that I drove a fifty-ton tank through a local neighborhood as an act of terror. I am however grateful that I lived to tell my tale.

Virginia's Sad Memorials

The American State of Virginia is not without a violent history either. Military Cemeteries with rows of identical white crosses abound there too. So many young people have died in war that most have no room for more bodies of America's heroes. In fact just three are still able to accept new burials. These three Cemeteries are Arlington, Quantico, and Culpeper which is the main thrust of this piece.
Arlington National Cemetery is the only national burial ground managed by the Department of the Army. It is the final resting place of Presidents, Supreme Court Justices, Astronauts, Medal of Honor Recipients and other Notable Americans and is, perhaps, best known for the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier - a young person collected at random from a battlefield. These days, Arlington National Cemetery has strict eligibility requirements.


Quantico National Cemetery stands on land that was once part of an American Marine Corps Base half way between Fredericksburg and Washington, DC. The base was a springboard for operations through two centuries. It was initially used by Virginia for naval operations in 1775, and later as a blockade point for the Confederate army. In 1977, it's usefulness expired, the Marine Corps donated it to the National Cemetery Administration which dedicated it on May 15, 1983. Culpeper National Cemetery is thirty-five miles west of Fredericksburg and was the site of many Civil War battles in the surrounding area. When the war ended, a program was initiated by the Federal Government to find the remains of all Union soldiers, and rebury them in National Cemeteries. Because such a large number of scattered Union soldiers lay dead and hastily buried nearby, Culpeper National Cemetery was established in 1867 to become their permanent home. In 1996, Culpeper National Cemetery was finally placed on the National Register of Historic Places in order to secure its future. The American Civil War

The American Civil War that lasted from 1861to 1865 is also called the Civil War when referred to in America. It was an internal war fought over the secession of southern States who combined together as a Confederacy. This was their response to the election of an anti-slavery Republican as President. In all, eleven Southern Slave States separated from the United States, and formed their "Confederate States of America".

The remaining twenty-five States - for there were fewer then that there are now - supported the Federal Government called the "Union". After four years of bloody battles mostly within the Southern States, the "Confederacy" surrendered, and slavery was outlawed everywhere in what was then the United States. Many disputes were partly resolved during a reconstruction era that followed, though others remained unresolved and are still nagging shadows today.

The Republican Party led by Abraham Lincoln had fought against the spread of slavery beyond the States in which it already existed. In the Presidential Election of 1860, the party promoted nationalism, in terms of which threats of disunion would become treason. After a Republican Election - but before the new administration took office on March 4, 1861 - seven "Cotton States" declared their secession and combined to create the "Confederate States of America". Both the outgoing administration of President James Buchanan, and the incoming administration of Abraham Lincoln challenged the legality of the secession, considering it rebellion. The other eight "Slave States" declined secession at that time. No country in the world would recognize the "Confederacy" either.

Civil War erupted on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces attacked a loyal American military installation at Fort Sumter in South Carolina. President Lincoln response was to summon a volunteer army recruited from every State to recapture Fort Sumter. In response, four more slave states declared for the "Confederacy.
Both sides raised large armies. The "Union" seized control of the border Rebel States early in the war, and established a naval blockade against the rest. However ground warfare in the East was inconclusive throughout 1861to 1862, although the "Confederacy" did succeed in beating back "Union" forces attempting to take its capital, Richmond during the Peninsular Campaign .


In September 1862, the "Confederate" campaign in Maryland ended in defeat at the Battle of Antietam. This dissuaded the British from intervening (remember, the United States had successfully fought a War of Independence against England ). Days after that battle, President Lincoln issued his Emancipation Proclamation, thereby legally ending slavery which was the original objective of the war.
More bloody battles and more "Confederate" losses followed. In 1863, Confederate General Robert E. Lee's northerly attack collapsed at the Battle of Gettysburg. To the west of Gettysburg, the "Union" took control of Vicksburg. This split the "Confederacy" into two distinct regions, while destroying much of their Western Army at the same time.
As a consequence of these successes General Ulysses Grant was given command of the Eastern "Union" Army in 1864, and the power to call on the armies of William Tecumseh Sherman, Philip Sheridan and others to attack the "Confederacy" from all directions, thanks to the North's increasingly coordinated manpower.


General Grant accordingly reorganized the "Union" Army, appointing fresh Generals to Divisional Command in support of his push into Virginia. There, he fought several grudge battles against General Lee in his "Overland Campaign" to seize Richmond. However he adjusted his plans in t he face of fierce resistance and targeted the Petersburg Siege instead. This almost obliterated the remainder of General Lee's Confederate Army.
Meanwhile, General Sherman captured Atlanta and marched as far as the sea, destroying Confederate infrastructure all along the way. When the Confederate attempt to defend Petersburg failed, the Confederate army retreated. Grant pursued relentlessly, ending in General Lee's surrender to him at Appomattox Court House on April 9, 1865. The American Civil War was an early example of the new form of industrial war . Railroads, telegraph systems, ships and mass-produced weapons all were all employed extensively. These practice of total war developed by Sherman in Georgia, and of the heartless trench warfare around Petersburg foreshadowed the drama of World War I in Europe, that was to follow a scant half century later.
The Civil Way remains the deadliest war in American history, resulting as it did in the death of an estimated 750,000 soldiers, and an unknown toll of civilian casualties. In fact, historian John Huddleston estimates that ten percent of all Northern men aged 20 to 45 years old, and thirty percent of all Southern white males aged 18 to 40 were sacrificed. Victory for the North meant the end of the Confederacy, and of slavery in the United States, and strengthened the role of Federal Government. The greatest loss of all is what else those three quarter million young souls could have achieved instead. Discovering Virginia
General Introduction The Commonwealth of Virginia is in the South Atlantic region of the United States where it adjoins the Atlantic Ocean. It's nickname is the "Old Dominion" and sometimes the "Mother of Presidents" after the eight U.S. presidents born there. The geography and climate are influenced by the Blue Ridge Mountains and Chesapeake Bay, which shelters much of its rich wildlife and plants. The State Capital is Richmond while Virginia Beach is the most populated City. A total population of over eight million souls live together peacefully these days.
Several indigenous Indian groups - including the Powhatan - were its original inhabitants. The London Company established the Colony of Virginia in 1607 as the first permanent New World English colony. Ironically, slave labor and land stolen from displaced Native American tribes contributed largely the colony's early political and economic success. Virginia was one of the members of the Confederacy in the American Civil War, during which Richmond became the Confederate capital.
Virginia has a total area of forty-two thousand square miles (including three thousand square miles of water) making it the thirty-fifth biggest S tate by area. It is bounded by Maryland and Washington D.C. to the north and east, and by the Atlantic Ocean to the east. To the south lie North Carolina and Tennessee, with Kentucky to the west, and West Virginia to the north and west. Geology and Terrain

There are five distinct regions - Tidewater, Piedmont, Blue Ridge Mountains, Ridge and Valley, and the Cumberland Plateau . Chesapeake Bay sets the contiguous portion of the Commonwealth apart from the two peninsulas on the Eastern Shore. The bay was formed by a meteoroid impacting some fifty million years ago Many of Virginia's rivers flow into it. These are the Potomac, Rappahannock, the York, and James, which between them create the three peninsulas in the bay. The Tidewater is a coastal plain between the Atlantic Coast and the fall line. It includes the Eastern Shore, and all the major estuaries of Chesapeake Bay. The Piedmont is a succession of sedimentary- and igneous rock-based low foothills that lie east of the mountains, and which were formed in the Mesozoic Era that began two hundred and fifty million years ago. This region, known also for its heavy clayey soil, includes the Southwest Mountains. The Blue Ridge Mountains are an offshoot of the Appalachian Mountain Chain. The tallest point in Virginia is Mount Rogers at 5,729 feet. The Ridge and Valley Region is west of these mountains, and includes the Great Appalachian Valley. The Cumberland Plateau and the Cumberland Mountains are in the south-west corner of Virginia just below the Allegheny Plateau. From here, rivers flow westwards into the Ohio River basin. Climate
Virginia state-wide averages Climate chart (explanation) J F M A M J J A S O N D 3.1 46 26 3.1 48 27 3.7 57 34 3.3 67 43 4 76 52 3.7 83 60 4.3 86 64 4.1 85 63 3.5 79 57 3.4 69 45 3.2 58 35 3.2 48 28 Average max. and min. temperatures in °F Precipitation totals in inches Source: University of Virginia data 1895-1998 [show]Metric conversion The Virginia climate is warmer and more humid as one travels south and east. Seasonal extremes include average lows of 26F in January to 86F highs in July. The Atlantic Ocean has a strong effect on coastal areas, where the inhabitants are subject to hurricanes, especially near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay. Virginia also has an annual average of 3 days to 45 days of thunderstorm activity each year. This is most pronounced in the western area with an average annual rainfall of 42.7 inches In winter, cold air masses arriving over the mountains may lead to significant snowfalls.Virginia averages seven tornadoes annually, most F2 or lower on the Fujita scale. In recent years, expansion of Washington D.C. southern suburbs into Northern Virginia has introduced an urban heat island primarily caused by increased absorption of solar radiation in more densely populated areas. Moreover in the American Lung Association's 2011 report, eleven Virginia Counties received failing grades for air quality - with Fairfax County having the worst of all, due mainly to automobile pollution. The haze in the mountains is caused in part by coal power plants, and not by nature as some may think romantically.
THE Culpeper National Cemetery was established in this natural paradise on April 13, 1867, at which stage it covered approximately six acres. At that time, it was dedicated as the final resting place for heroes of the United States of both sides - especially those who fell in battle or died of disease during the Civil War in the immediate Culpeper area.

On October 21, 1975, the Veterans of Foreign Wars were instrumental in arranging for the donation of a further 10.51 acres from the President of Bingham & Taylor Corporation as a memorial to all corporation employees who served in the armed forces at any time. In 2001, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the American Legion, local officials and several residents succeeded in acquiring a further twelve acres of land. This enabled the cemetery to extend burial services to our most honored veterans for another 50 years and possibly more.

Eligibility includes all active duty members of the Armed Forces, and Veterans who served in the military and were discharged under conditions other than dishonorable discharge . Veteran's spouses and their dependent children are also entitled to interment there.

Donated burial flags are flown on Veterans' Day and Memorial Day to honor all the fallen heroes. Cemetery Records Online gives on-line access to all burial records of the Culpeper National Cemetery and elsewhere in Virginia. Culpeper is located downtown in Fredericksburg on 305, US Avenue with entrance from E Stevens Street across the railroad. Visitors are welcomed from dawn to dusk on every single day of the year.
Flora and fauna Despite the depredation of a war in which so many innocent men so tragically died, forests still cover 65% of the Virginia, with mainly deciduous, broad leafed trees. Lower altitudes are more likely to have the small but dense stands of moisture-loving hemlocks and mosses in in which cornered soldiers attempted their last stands, with hickory and oak predominating on Blue Ridge. In the lowland tidewater wetlands the same yellow pines still tend to dominate, with bald cypress wetland-forests in the Great Dismal and Nottoway swamps. Other common trees and plants the spirits of soldiers may still visit include chestnut, maple, tulip poplar, mountain laurel, milkweed, daisies, and many species of ferns.
The largest areas of wilderness are along the Atlantic Coast where Confederate forces fell in numbers. In the western mountains, populations of trillium wildflowers as many as the fallen dead are found. The Atlantic coast regions are also host to bounteous plant life. This includes Southeast Coastal Plain Maritime flora that's found primarily in Southeastern Virginia. Mammals that starving soldiers fed on as Confederate forces collapsed into small units, include white-tailed deer, black bear, beaver, bobcat, coyote, raccoon, skunk, groundhog, virginia oppossum, gray fox, red fox, and eastern cottontail rabbit. Birds that might have watched the carnage from above are cardinals, barred owls, carolina chickadees, red-tailed hawks, ospreys, brown pelicans, quail, sea gulls, bald eagles, and wild turkeys.
The Walleye, brook trout, roanoke bass, and blue catfish are among the 210 known species of freshwater fish that frolic freely in waters that once ran red with blood, while running brooks with rocky bottoms are often inhabited by a plentiful amounts of crayfish and salamanders too. Chesapeake Bay is also host to many maritime species such as blue crabs, clams, oysters, and rockfish - also known as striped bass to the fisher folk,
Virginia now has 30 National Park Service units, including Great Falls Park, Appalachian Trail, and Shenandoah National Park. Chesapeake Bay, while not a national park as such, is protected by both state and federal legislation, and by the Chesapeake Bay Program which conducts restoration on the bay and its watershed. The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge extends into North Carolina, as does the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge, which marks the beginning of the Outer Banks. This preserves as heritage places that young men gone off to war once explored as lads, and first handled rifles on more innocent hunts. Thankfully the scourge of Civil War is long gone here, and peace returned to Virginia.

Things of Interest in the Culpeper Area

This charming little building is a log house covered outside by clapboard. It is also Culpeper's oldest house, and a reminder of its colonial era. The interior is quite original with the exception of a few repairs. It was already in existence in 1749 when Culpeper County came into being following excision from Orange County. At that time, it was in the "countryside" as the town limits did not extend this far south.
Address: 807 S. Main St., Culpeper Architect, builder, or engineer: unknown Architectural Style: Other Area of Significance: Architecture,Exploration/Settlement, Social History Period of Significance: 1800-1824 Owner: Local Government Historic Function: Domestic, Recreation And Culture Historic Sub-function: Multiple Dwelling, Museum, Single Dwelling Current Function: Vacant/Not In Use

Croftburn Farm Address: Croftsburn Farm Rd., Culpepper Look out for the sign for Croftburn Farm on State Route 3, just as you're heading out of Culpeper toward Fredericksburg. This family-owned farm has been in operation since the 1950s, and produces all-natural, grass-fed superb angus beef and lamb. Until recently, the farm sold mostly to restaurants and a few lucky individuals. However the owners have now opened a retail market in Culpeper, at 16178 Rogers Rd that's open six days a week except Mondays.


Culpeper Historic District
The Culpeper Historic District is significant both for its architectural cohesiveness, and its associations with commercial, military, political and transportation history. Culpeper was founded in 1759 and originally named Fairfax. Most of the commercial buildings are built of brick in Italianate and Neoclassical styles. The quiet, tree-shaded residential streets hold a rich variety of domestic architecture too. Address: Roughly bounded by Edmonson, Southern Railroad, Stevens, and West Streets Architect, builder, or engineer: Multiple Architectural Style: Late Victorian, Mid and late 19th And 20th Century revivals.
Areas of Significance: Architecture, Military,Transportation, Politics/Government, Commerce Periods of Significance: 1800-1824, 1825-1849, 1850-1874,1875-1899, 1900-1924, 1925-1949 Owner: Private, Local Government Historic Function: Commerce/Trade, Domestic Commerce/Trade, Domestic

Culpeper National Cemetery
Architect, builder, or engineer: Meigs, Montgomery C. Architectural Style: Second Empire Area of Significance: Architecture Period of Significance:1850-1874, 1875-1899, 1900-1924,1925-1949 Owner: Federal Historic Function: Funerary Historic Sub-function: Cemetery Current Function: Funerary Current Sub-function: Cemetery

Eckington School


Eckington School was built in 1895 as a one-room frame school for African-American students from the nearby communities of Eckington and Poplar Ridge. The school building is typical of the ungraded schools of the 19th Century, that had all ages of school pupils housed together in the same room. Such schools were common in rural communities until the Middle 20th Century. Closed in 1941, the structure is a rare preserved example of the nearly vanished one-room schoolhouse type - and of the importance of education among rural black communities in the decades following the Civil War. Area of Significance: Education, Black Period of Significance: 1875-1899, 1900-1924, 1925-1949 Owner: Private Historic Function: Education Historic Sub-function: School Current Function: Vacant/Not In Use

Elmwood
Gracious two-story family home with multiple architectural features of interest. Some unusual details over face-brick.
Historic Significance: Architecture/Engineering Architect, builder, or engineer: Oddenino,Joseph Architectural Style: Italianate Area of Significance: Architecture, Art Period of Significance: 1850-1874 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic Historic Sub-function: Secondary Structure, Single Dwelling Current Function: Domestic Current Sub-function: Secondary Structure, Single Dwelling

Farley
Although Culpeper County boasts its share of venerable homes, none present more grandly than Farley, north of Brandy Station. It was the headquarters of the 6th Army Corps when encamped in 1864. In 1983, Farley was sold to a family who lovingly put their heart into its restoration. It has won the coveted Great American Home award from the National Trust for Historic Preservation.Truly, Farley is solidly back from the ruins of war and safe again
Address: North of Brandy Station on VA 679, or South of Hazel River, Brandy Station Historic Significance: Architecture/Engineering, Event Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: Other, Federal Area of Significance: Social History, Architecture,Military Period of Significance: 1800-1824 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic Historic Sub-function: Secondary Structure, Single Dwelling Current Function: Vacant/Not In Use

Greenville Rectangular, face brick double-story structure embellished by imposing neo-classical columns and pediment. Almost a folly on open farmland. Address: North-East of Raccoon's Ford, Raccoon's Ford Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: Other, Mid 19th Century Revival Area of Significance: Architecture Period of Significance: 1850-1874 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic Historic Sub-function: Secondary Structure, Single Dwelling Current Function: Vacant/Not In Use

Greenwood Greenwood is a small yet elegant single-story early-19th Century plantation house, now set in the middle of a small farm on the outskirts of the town of Culpeper, Virginia, Address: 1931 Orange Rd., Culpeper Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: Other Area of Significance: Architecture Period of Significance: 1800-1824, 1825-1849 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic Historic Sub-function: Single Dwelling Current Function: Domestic Current Sub-function: Single Dwelling

Hansborough Ridge Winter Encampment Six miles east of downtown Culpeper, this tiny village provides insights into Civil War times through a colonial-era crossroads, and a semi-secluded spring. The latter was the site of a cavalry engagement. There's also a ridge lined with winter huts for Union soldiers, and a rich history of travel, taverns and (legend has it) tawdry behavior too.

Address: Stevensburg Area of Significance: Military, Historic - Non-Aboriginal Cultural Affiliation American Military Period of Significance: 1850-1874 Owner: Private Historic Function: Defense Historic Sub-function: Fortification, Military Facility Current Function: Agriculture/Subsistence, Landscape Current Sub-function: Agricultural Fields, Forest

Hill Mansion Hill Mansion is a sophisticated example of the Italianate style - one of several picturesque designs popular in the 1850s. The home was built in 1857 for one Edward Baptist Hill, a member of a prominent Culpeper family. The house served as a Confederate hospital and was visited both by Lieutenant General A. P. Hill (brother of the builder) and Gen. Robert E. Lee, whose wounded son was nursed there. Later on in the war it was used as a Union headquarters (although the Hill family were allowed to occupy two rooms).
Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: Italianate Area of Significance: Architecture, Military, LandscapeArchitecture Period of Significance: 1850-1874 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic, Landscape Historic Sub-function: Forest, Single Dwelling Current Function: Domestic, Landscape Current Sub-function: Forest, Single Dwelling

Little Fork Church

Little Fork Church, St. Mark's Parish, is the only Colonial Church in Culpeper County . It was originally built in 1731 as a "Chapel of Ease" by Governor Spotswood and completed in 1776 at a cost of 30,000 pounds of tobacco. It is actually the third building on this location, two others having been destroyed by fire around 1750 and 1770. It is also known as Oak Shade Church.

Architect, builder, or engineer: Ariss, John Architectural Style: Colonial Area of Significance: Architecture Period of Significance: 1750-1799 Owner: Private Historic Function: Religion Historic Sub-function: Religious Structure Current Function: Recreation And Culture, Religion Current Sub-function: Monument/Marker, Religious Structure

Locust Grove (Old Masonic Lodge) Also known as Goodwin Farm


Address: Locust Grove Farm, VA 736, Rapidan Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: Federal Area of Significance: Architecture Period of Significance: 1700-1749, 1750-1799, 1825-1849,1850-1874, 1875-1899 Owner: Private Historic Function: Agriculture/Subsistence, Domestic

Historic Sub-function: Agricultural Fields, Single Dwelling Current Function: Agriculture/Subsistence, Domestic Current Sub-function: Agricultural Fields, Single Dwelling

Madden's Tavern (Also known as Maddenville Farm)


Madden's Tavern is a rare occurrence in antebellum Virginia , for it once functioned as a prime example of black entrepreneurship. The building was completed in 1840 by a free black named Willis Madden , and was run by him too. Previously he worked at a variety of trades, including blacksmith, distiller, cobbler, teamster, farm laborer, and nail maker. He used the money earned from these jobs to buy eighty-seven acres in Culpeper County , and to set up his business at the crossroads of Old Fredericksburg Road and Peola-Mills-Kellysville Road. The complex included a four-roomed main building, a general store, a blacksmith wheelwright shop, and several other outbuildings and sheds. The western half of the tavern housed the family, while the eastern portion comprised a downstairs public room, and a loft upstairs for overnight guests. Railroad development hit Madden's enterprise hard, and the Civil War unfortunately did the rest. Address: VA 610, Lignum Area of Significance: Transportation, Black, Commerce Period of Significance: 1825-1849, 1850-1874, 1875-1899,1900-1924 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic Historic Sub-function: Hotel Current Function: Domestic Current Sub-function: Single Dwelling

Maple Springs Farm (Historic Building with War Graves) Address: 20509 Clover Hill Rd., Jeffersonton Architectural Style: Georgian Area of Significance: Social History, Architecture Period of Significance: 1750-1799, 1800-1824, 1825-1849,1850-1874, 1875-1899, 1900-1924 Owner: Private Historic Function; Domestic Historic Sub-function: Single Dwelling Current Function: Agriculture/Subsistence, Vacant/Not In Use Current Sub-function: Storage

Mitchells Presbyterian Church (Also known as Waddell Memorial Presbyterian Church) Built in 1879 under inspiration of Reverend John P. Strider, this simple Carpenter's Gothic church contains the most elaborate examples of late 19th Century, folk-style frescoes in the Commonwealth. The Italian immigrant painte Oddenino painted the frescoes between 1892 and 1899, and the ceiling to resemble beams framing rosettes.
Address: VA 652, Mitchells
Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: Gothic, Other Historic Person: Oddenino,Joseph Significant Year: 1892, 1899, 1879 Area of Significance: Architecture, Art Period of Significance: 1875-1899 Owner: Private Historic Function:Religion Historic Sub-function: Religious Structure Current Function: Religion Current Sub-function: Religious Structure

Rapidan Historic District

Rapidan is a small unincorporated community in Culpeper County, Virginia. Bisected by the Rapidan River, it is home to the Rapidan historic district and dates to back the 18th Century, when it was a mill town known as Waugh's Ford. It was renamed Rapid Ann Station in 1854, and Rapidan in 1886. The town was mostly destroyed in the American Civil War, and later became a center for the shipment of wood products


Salubria

Salubria is an 18th Century manor house built by Reverend John Thompson - the rector of the Little Fork Church from 1740 to 1772. The building is a loving testament of his love for the woman he dated, and who became his wife. The story of their union is romantic, and endows Salubria with rich historic texture in no small amount.
Address: East of the Junction of Routes 3 and 663, Stevensburg Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: No Style Listed Area of Significance: Social History, Architecture Period of Significance: 1700-1749 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic Historic Sub-function: Single Dwelling Current Function: Work In Progress

Signal Hill (Also known as Mount Castle) Address: 16190 Germanna Highway, Culpeper Architectural Style: Late Victorian Area of Significance: Architecture Period of Significance: 1900-1924, 1925-1949 Owner: Private Historic Function: Agriculture/Subsistence, Domestic Historic Sub-function: Agricultural Outbuildings, SingleDwelling Current Function: Agriculture/Subsistence, Domestic Current Sub-function: Agricultural Outbuildings, SingleDwelling

Slaughter-Hill House
Slaughter-Hill House in Culpeper, Virginia (also known as the Corrie Hill House or the Roger Dixon House) was built in 1775. Address: 306 N. West St., Culpeper Historic Significance: Architecture/Engineering Architect, builder, or engineer: Unknown Architectural Style: Federal, Greek Revival Area of Significance: Architecture Period of Significance: 1750-1799, 1800-1824, 1825-1849 Owner: Private Historic Function: Domestic Historic Sub-function: Single Dwelling Current Function: Domestic Historic Walking Tour


Now we know the history of Culpeper, the story behind the long rows of tombstones and the history of the buildings that remain, let's go out into the countryside and see what we can find of interest.

Our virtual tour is inspired by Virginia Morton - the author of the Civil War novel "Marching Through Culpeper". We'll learn first hand about the fighting that took place there, and the stories of Culpeper's noteworthy citizens. To tempt your appetite, did you know that Culpeper County witnessed the movement of more troops than any other spot in America? Stop 1: The Depot
Here we learn how Culpeper's strategic location made it a favorite camping ground for both sides to the war, and hear stories of some famous names who passed through it's railroad station. We'll also hear a detailed description the Battle of Culpeper Court House itself. This raged around the depot on September 13, 1863, when General George Armstrong Custer played a major role.


REVIEW


"Members of our Boy Scout Group are excited by what they learned today from Virginia Morton's knowledge. She knows her subject well. Thank You!



Stop 2: St. Stephens Church
Our visit to Saint Stephens Episcopal Church
(the oldest Church in town) was emotional because both sides used it as a hospital and both General J.E.B. Stuart and General Robert E. Lee stopped by there. An interesting twist was how the Reverend was threatened by General John Pope, and how some young ladies from the Parish saved the bell. Stop 3: Virginia House Hotel The Virginia House Hotel (also site of Shackelford House) was frequented by James Ewell Brown "Jeb" Stuarr (a U.S. Army officer from Virginia and a Confederate States Army general) and gallant Major John Pelham, Commander of the Stuart Horse Artillery. They were both frequent visitors at Henry Shackelford's House across the street. It is rumored that John Pelham even had a romantic relationship with Shackelford's daughter Bessie who was reportedly quite a catch! Stop 4: Home of "Extra Billy" Smith
"Extra Billy" Smith was twice Governor of Virginia and one of the oldest Generals in the Confederate army. His former home served as General Grant's headquarters during the Winter Encampment of 1863-64. Stop 5: The Courthouse
Our tour proceeds on to the current Courthouse passing the site of the original one and the boyhood home of General A. P. Hill. Once inside, we have an opportunity to sit and listen to events that played out at the Courthouse during the Civil War, as acted by an experienced cast.
Stop 6: The National Cemetery and Hill Mansion


The National Cemetery established in 1866 (and still an active burial ground today) is a highlight for many visitors. Union Soldiers were re-interred here primarily from the Cedar Mountain Battlefield. The house nearby was the home of Edward Baptist Hill, the older brother of the General. It was home to A. P. Hill and his wife, Dolly, throughout the war, and Robert E. Lee even visited his middle son Rooney there, when he was recovering from wounds he received at the Battle of Brandy Station. The Womens' Side of the war is discussed in detail, as is the Winter Encampment of the Union Army during 1863-64.
Stop 7: The Depot Our tour is over almost as quickly as it began, although we are allowed to wander freely afterwards. We bid farewell with the tale of the "Gray Ghost," that played out here a long, long time ago echoing in our ears.
The Thoughts We Take Away

My own personal ones are of the bitter-sweet sadness of youngsters who went off to war, and, if they returned at all, were horribly scarred in body, mind and soul. And if they died a lonely death instead, did laughter ever echo again through those stately ante-bellum homes. Or was there only silent sadness and a mother's grief?

And what of the Generals and other leaders who started the Civil War? They remain heroes to some even to this day, despite all the tragedy they caused. But, as they lay dying on their death-beds, did they ever pause to rue the misery through which they led the youth? Or did they die content with what they did?

Next time you wander through a military cemetery alone, set your mind free from politics and glorious history. Think of the individuals who lie there instead. And bless your maker that you are not counted among them.Commit yourself to fighting for peace instead.
