b. Interactive voice response A specific numberprovided by the carrier can be called, and an Interactive VoiceResponse (IVR) would ask questions and guide the user through. TheIVR can also take the payment details and process the payment. Thee-ticket can be either sent as email or can be collected over thecounter. Example: JetAirways uses the IVR system for payment at thecall center. After the itinerary is created by the call centreagent, the customer can pay for his tickets via the IVR.Thisensures that the payment details are secure. After the payment issuccessful, the e-ticket is automatically generated by theapplication and mailed to the customer Shanghai SmartPay Jieyin haspartnered with Lu Hai Kong travel agency in Hefei, Anhui Province,to jointly launch mobile and telephone based payment for airlineelectronic tickets. As part of the launch promotion, customers whobuy airline e-ticket in Lu Hai Kong ticket agency and processpayment via interactive voice response (IVR)

2. Smart Card Asmart card (also known as chip card or integrated circuitcard-ICC), is a pocket-sized card with embedded integrated circuitswhich can process information. It can receive input, process itusing the ICC applications and delivers the output. The airlinesmart card enables to easily and quickly identify passengers, boarda flight, obtain a ticket, and pay for other products and services.The smart card provides airlines the opportunity to make savings indistribution costs, provides better security against fraud, allowsmore of their passengers to use self-service facilities, andprovides a better means of identification of their frequenttravelers. Examples: Air France has issued smart cards to frequentflyers on its routes from Paris Orly to Marseille and Toulouse. Thecard is a contact-less smart card using the Mifare radio frequencytechnology (similar to the Lufthansa card). Gemplus is the supplierof the cards. The card has been used as passenger identification,the ticket and boarding authority.

3. GDS developed Application GDS providesapplications that the participating carrier can purchase and use toinform its passengers by means of alerts on their mobile phones.The alerts can be for flight delays, terminal/gate changes, flightcancellations, airport/airline alerts, city/country securityalerts, as well as a trip reminder service. Alerts can be privateor custom branded with contact information and can be sent viaVoice, e-mail, fax or Short Messaging System (SMS). Customizedalerts or marketing messages can be also created to get in touchwith the passengers anywhere they may be; Patheo offers this same applications too. The alertscan be delivered to travelers via WML and HDML phones, Web-enabledPDAs and RIM Blackberry devices. Any device that receives e-mail orSMS (AOL, MSN, Yahoo, ICQ) can receive Alert Notifications.Example: Sabre InformSM mobile service is a solution that providesthe participating carriers passengers with access to their travelplans 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Mobile services for thecustomers can be enabled at minimal cost, time and effort. There isno hardware or software to purchase, no developers to train and nosystems to maintain and operate. Convenient, efficient and easy toimplement, Sabre InformSM helps foster long-term customerrelationships and maintain a distinct competitive advantage.

4. Airline developed Application A softwareapplication can be installed on the phone that would provide accessto a specific airline s reservation system, book, pay and generatee-tickets via phone. This would require a JAVA enabled handset withGPRS connection. Example: Jet Airways has launched a mobileairline-ticketing service called JetWallet. JetWallet allows tobook, pay (via credit card) and generate e-tickets on the phone.E-Tickets are emailed to a user specified email addresses, and acopy of the details is sent via SMS. JetWallet also allows tochange,cancel and refund e-tickets on the phone.There s also anoption to check-in via JetWallet. The application can be used fordomestic flights only.

5. Phone Manufacturer/GDS developed ApplicationMobile phone manufacturers generally provide integrated softwarefor the use of applications like MS Office and also for connectingto the Internet using GPRS on WAP. These applications can alsoprovide pre-programmed interface to a GDS. Using this feature,travel plans can be made, schedules can be seen and tickets canalso be booked. Example: Sabre Holdings signed an agreement withMotorola to power its Mobile Office Solution with travel andticketing capabilities for mobile professionals. Motorola sintegration with Sabre's wireless travel is a part of its TravelConnector component of the Mobile Office Solution. Also Patheo (Patheo GDS) has a similartechnology using mobile office electric transactions on current GDSsolutions. Motorola and WORLDSPAN furnishtravel information via Motorola's Internet-access-enabled wirelessdevices. Through Motorola's Mobile Internet Exchange communicationsplatform (also known as the MIX platform) and its enhanced voicecapabilities carriers will be able to offer their customers accessto WORLDSPAN's travel services through any phone. WORLDSPAN is thefirst travel channel provider to the core content of Motorola's MIXplatform.

6. WAP sites of GDS The WAP versions of the sites ofGDS provides users of mobile phones to surf the site on their GPRSmobile phones and plan the travel. Example: Amadeus, aSpanish-based technology provider for the travel and tourismindustries, is live with its Wireless Travel Management( WTM ) system together with Scandinavianregional carrier Wideroe. The system enables Wideroe's customers tocheck flight availability and book or cancel flights with over 500airlines around the globe from a WAP-enabled mobile device. Inaddition, passengers traveling with Wideroe can receive real-timeupdates about flight departure and arrival times. WTM was developedjointly by Amadeus, Swedish telecomms systems provider Ericsson andSmart, Amadeus' Scandinavian and Baltic distributionpartner.



Regardless of the kind of ticket and how travellersmanage their "pre-flight processes",

Small valuables: cash, credit cards, jewelry, cameras. Critical items: medicine, keys, passport, tour vouchers,business papers. Irreplaceable items: manuscript, heirlooms. Fragile items: eyeglasses, glass containers, liquids.

