between 24 and 32 Medium Earth Orbit satellites that transmit precise microwave signals History of GPS

T he first satellite navigation system called Transit was used by the US Navy and it was first successfully tested in the year1960. By making use of a group of five satellites, it was able to provide an approximate navigational fix once per hour. In the year1967, the U.S. Navy developed Timation satellite that had an ability to place accurate clocks in the outer space, which is a technology on which GPS relies upon.

The design of the present G PS is partly based on a similar ground-based radio navigation systems like LORAN and Decca Navigator which was developed in early 1940s and later used during the World War II. Additional inspiration came when Soviet Union launched its first Sputnik in the year1957. A team of U.S. scientists, which was led by Dr. Richard B Kershner had been monitoring Sputnik's radio transmissions and they discovered that due to Doppler effect, the frequency of the radio signal that was being transmitted by Sputnik was higher when the satellite was approaching and lower when it was moving away from them.As they knew their exact position on the globe, they were able to pinpoint the satellite's location along its orbit simply by measuring the Doppler distortion. Since it becam e fully operational in the year1993, GPS has now become a widely used application for navigation worldwide.

The operational system began with the Block 2 spacecraft and the Block 2A spacecraft resulted in a slight improvement as compared to Block 2.

were used for demonstrating the feasibility of the Global Positioning System. The orbit inclination used that was used for these satellites was 63 degrees, that differs from the 55 degrees inclination used for the operational system. A GPS re ceiver can calculate its position as it has the capability of precisely timing the signals that are sent by the GPS satellites which are high above the Earth. Every satellite continually transmits the messages containing the time at which the message was sent along with precise orbital information and rough orbits of all the GPS satellites. The receiver can measures the transit time for each message and also computes the distance to each satellite. Geometric trilateration is used for combining these distances with the location of the satellites in order to determine a receiver's location. The position is then displayed, along with a moving map display or longitude and latitude. The elevation information may also be included. A number of GPS units also show derived information like direction and speed which are further calculated from position changes.

Coarse-acquisition or C/A code is meant for civilian use, and it is deliberately degraded for security purpose. The accuracy of a typical civilian GPS receiver that has C/A code is about 100 meters. Military's Precision or P code is not corrupted, and it is capable of providing positional accuracy to approximately 20 meters. A number of on-line tutorials on how the GPS works alongwith its applications are easily available. GPS satellites are controlled by the GPS Master Control Station or MCS which is located at located at Falcon Air Force Base just outside Colorado Springs, Colorado. It must be mentioned that the ground segment includes four active-tracking ground antennas along with five passive-tracking monitor stations. GPS receivers are available in a variety of formats and these vary from devices that can be integrated into phones, cars and watches. These can also be integrated into dedicated devices like those shown here. The user's GPS receiver lies in the the user segment of the GPS. The GPS receivers are generally composed of an antenna, that can be tuned to various frequencies transmitted by satellites, receiver-processors along with and a highly-stable clock which is often a crystal oscillator. They may include a display for providing location along with speed information to the user. Generally a receiver is described by the number of its channels. This actually signifies the number of satellites that it can monitor simultaneously. It was originally limited to four or five but over the years, this has progressively increased and as of 2007, the GPS receivers typically have 12 to 20 channels

It is the only fully functional global navigation satellite system or GNSS in the world. It can be used freely, and it is often used by civilians for the purpose of navigation. It is also a useful tool for land surveying, map-making, scientific uses and hobbies like geocaching. Precise time reference is also used in many applications that include the scientific study of earthquakes. GPS is a required as a key synchronization resource for all cellular networks, like Qualcomm CDMA air interface that is being used by a number of wireless carriers in a number of countries.
Initially the best quality signal had been reserved for military use and the signal that was made available for civilian use was intentionally degraded under "Selective Availability" but selective availability was ended in the year 2000, thus improving the precision of civilan GPS from 100m to about 20m.