Toys - Inu-Yasha INU-YASHA COSPLAY
MANUFACTURED BY Great Eastern

Inu Yasha Beads of Subjugation Necklace - $9.99[ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha Cosplay Ears Headband - $5.99[ADD TO BASKET]

INU-YASHA ACTION FIGURES
MANUFACTURED BY TOYNAMI

Inu Yasha "Naraku" Action Figure Series 4 - $14.99 [ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha "Kikyo" Action Figure Series 2 - $14.99 [ADD TO BASKET]

INU-YASHA PLUSHIES
MANUFACTURED BY GREAT EASTERN

Inu Yasha 9" Kirara Plush - $17.00 [ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha 13" Kirara Plush - $34.99 [ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha Sesshomaru 8" Plush - $15.00 [ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha Sango 8" Plush - $13.00 [ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha Miroku Plush - $12.00 [ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha Jaken 8" Plush - $13.00 [ADD TO BASKET]

Inu Yasha Jaken 17" Plush - $35.00 [ADD TO BASKET] Cou ld you believe these pr i ces??

Day One - Arrival

I arrived at Narita Ai rport on the outskirts of Tokyo around seven in the evening, en route to S uki yaki where I would be staying in an apartment building in a nearby settlement. My first impression was " O h W ow, I'm in Japan!" . You see, I had been studying Japanese culture and language for seventy-nine years, so this was something of a cu lmination of my efforts .

After I settled down in my overnight accommodation, I popped down to a bar in downtown Tokyo. I was really looking forward to a cool beer after such a long airplane flight. I soon found the Japanese were really happy at getting a chance to practice their English on a real live American. I can confirm that t he Japanese enjoy their nights out social drinking. I can also confirm they make for really funny drunks.

Day Two - Getting There / The Festival

I w o ke early the following morning, to find the full impact ha d yet to sink in, so took a walk along the quiet streets to catch up with myself . People were very friendly, despite the fact that I was obviousl y a foreigner. So far, I was really surprised at how much English was in general use. It seemed that t heoretically at least, I could find my way to Sukiyaki without speaking a word of Japanese.

I spent the best part of the day taking a leisurely breakfas t (my last American-style meal for the next few days), packing up, finding my way to the railway station, and catching a slow train to Sukiyaki. My apartment was compa ct, chic and stylish, just the way I hoped it would be.

That night, I attended the annual Inu Yasha Festival. Most tourist and Japanese girls had dressed up in summer kimino's they call yukata (lighter and simpler than regular kimonos, but still just as attractive). The boys had on whatever they felt good in. So we had German lads in lederhosen, the Brits in Union Jack tee-shirts , and even a Texan in a stetson hat (definitely not me).

The main Sukiyaki streets were closed off to traffic, and packed with slowly moving people as far as my eyes could see. Although the streets were thronging I could actually see over most everyone's heads, because I'm six fo ot six inches tall and had a height advantage.

Everywhere, I could spot stunning floats filled with reveling men and women, and a ll with beers in hand. The se varied in design from dragons to lighted lanterns to bells, and even religious statues. At the very top of every single float was a platform where a representation of Inu-Yash a stood, wearing festival yukata (yes the g eisha boys also wear them f rom time-to-time). And oh boy did they look cute shouting, waving, and ringing their golden bells with silk tassels .

There were food stalls in nooks and crann ies where every Japanese takeaway imaginable seemed available. T he delicious smells were hard to resist , because everything is cooked right in front of you . I had to choose a simple meal from the wide variety available, because I knew festival food would be pricey, but really worth it too.

Here's what I dined on off paper plates on th at memorable night:
T acoyaki - B arbequed squid meat encased in a fried, breaded teriyaki ball. Chicken ka-bob called Y akutori - The meat is cooked in teriyaki sauce, and served with barbecued onion and bell peppers on the skewer between the chickenpieces. Omousoba - F ried noodles wrapped up in egg almost like an omelet.
Day Three - Temple of the Golden Pavilion

The next day , I indulged myself in a field trip to Kinkakuji - or The Temple of the Golden Pavilion - that's built on the spot where it's claimed InuYasha's father received his famous swords. The famous Japanese writer Yukio Mishima fictionalized the story of how the original temple was burned down by a monk who had become obsessed with its beauty. Hence what you see is a highl y effecti ve recreation of past glory .

I personally found Kinkakuji Temple exquisitely beautuiful, even though I was not allowed to enter . So I sat down on a convenient tree stump to admire it from afar. The surrounding nature is nice, but nothing too breathtaking, so if you're planning to see Kinkakuji and are pressed for time, you could probably knock it off in an hour at most. You see it, you're awed by the temple's stunning beauty, and that's about it.

Day Four - A ffections To uching Across Time

I dedi cated the nex t day to watching InuY asha blockbuster Inuyasha: Toki o Koeru Omoi , which translates to Affections To uching Across Time . It was a pretty big deal in Japan still, with special offers highlighted for store goods , posters everywhere and TV previews seemingly all the time. My mother paid for the tickets in advance, which was great because ticket prices were astronomical compared to what I'm used to ( ta ma !).

In the Japan ese vernacular the program unfolded as follows:
Previews for upcoming anime movies Clips from previous Inu Yasha movies Upcoming American movies A whole host of commercials for "Pearl Harbor" - hot st u ff then! I had previously read that many movies shown locally a re brought over from America - with Japanese subtitles added locally , because not many films are produced in Jap an itself .

My Final Day

I visited quite possibly the most beautiful location I have ever been to, nam ely Katsura Villa , to be gobsmacked by s tone walkways, unbelievably green trees and colorful flowers, m oss-covered bridges, water so clear I could see tiny fish swimming at the bottom. And this simply a background for absolutely stunning marvels of architecture.

The guide led us around the garden, mostly pointing out buildings and structures and their historical relevance, while we tried to explore the incredible natur al plantings . After the tour, we were escorted out and back to the lobby. Guess what you can buy there? More souvenirs!

Last Thoughts

