check out video of in-studio performances and live events from The Current. Grooving your body has never been easier. The Current provides a monthly playlist you can purchase from Amazon to help spice up whatever it is you do to stay active.
Let's say you were invited to a fancy dance, but didn't feel like dancing, much less like talking to anyone. What song would hit the spot and make you feel a little better?"

The Hopefuls "The Fuses Refuse to Burn," the debut album of The Hopefuls has been released four years ago. Formerly named The Olympic Hopefuls until the Olympic committee protested, they've had more changes than just their name before the release of their new album, "Now Playing at the One-Seat Theater."
Longwave With their fourth album "Secret are Sinister" under their belts, Brooklyn indie-rockers Longwave are hoping the release of this album will go better than the last. Challenges like Hurricane Katrina, a record label merger, and a canceled tour plagued the release of their previous album "There's A Fire." After some encouragement, the band decided to record another record.
Wayne Coyne brings Christmas to Mars It's natural that the Flaming Lips' new dramatic feature film, Christmas on Mars - conceived by bandleader Wayne Coyne and billed as "a fantastical film freak-out" - should contain all of the psychedelia, drama, humor and hopefulness that fans have come to love about the band's music itself.
Golden Animals They met in Brooklyn where the duo of guitarist Tommy Eisner and drummer Linda Beecroft created the bluesy psychedelic folk-rock of Golden Animals. After the release of their first EP in 2006, they moved to southern California for a more laidback atmosphere to write their full-length.
Krista Detor Singer-songwriter Krista Detor has roots all over the U.S., including California, North Dakota, and her current home in Bloomington, Indiana. She's moved around a lot in her career and her touring schedule echoes that long road. She'll be doing her third European tour in 12 months in March of 2009.
Tom Morello Tom Morello might be a familiar name for you. After all, he worked with the famous band Rage Against The Machine. However, he takes on the moniker "The Nightwatchman" when he performs his Woody Guthrie-inspired solo work.
