reminded friends that Obama's passage to power had kicked off on the steps of the Springfield, Illinois old Capitol building the previous year. At the time many of these believed that the young African-American had the best chance of unseating the old order.
When his journey to the White House began last year on the steps of the old capitol in Springfield, Illinois where Lincoln's ended, Eric Sing endorsed an African-American candidate who was running against the entrenched interests of the Democratic Party and against all other odds too. He went on to capture Iowa and beat Senator Hillary Clinton in the most grueling primary that any could recall, even though the result seemed to close to mention. "I continue to support Barack Obama less than a week from election day, where I believe history is in the making," he concluded.


A colleague sitting next to him and sucking thoughtfully on his pipe agreed. "We are dealing with the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, " he began. "Moreover,' he continued, we are caught up with an illegal occupation of an independent foreign country and a half-neglected war against terrorists in Afghanistan. Let's not forget the Afghans sent the British Empire and the Soviets packing. President Bill Clinton bequeathed a booming economy and a budget surplus. All that George Bush will be remembered for is ten trillion dollars in deficit, and an economy on the verge of a terrifying recession.


"John McCain offers the same dismal trickle-down economic future thanks to de-regulatory ideas that are little change from the deluded policies of George Bush . To add insult to injury he's suggesting even more wealthy tax-breaks, while abandoning our middle class to their own devices. What's more, John McCain has in mind to tax our health care benefits, cut Medicare and Medicaid benefits and demolish what's left of our hopes for universal health care."

"I couldn't agree with you more," Eric Sung said to his old pipe-smoking friend. "What's more, he wants to privatize social security in midst of an imploding market, and risk our fortunes on uncertainty."

An elderly gent sitting hitherto in a quiet corner chimed in. "He doesn't even want out of an illicit Afghan war that's clocking up ten billion dollars every month. Poor American taxpayers!! In fact, the Republican candidate seems more in favor of cold war tactics where stubbornness, silence and the threat of violence defines our national politics - rather than openness and a willingness to engage our enemies.
"John McCain claims to speak for justice and equality, yet he has consistently opposed the feminine right to choose, and is anti affirmative-action strategies. John McCain may portray himself as a reformed maverick and a reformer. Let's not forget that he voted consistently with President Bush, and has backed away from every reform that he once championed." "I agree," Eric Sung said summing up. "Obama is our man. John McCain can never become the solution for the future of America. In fact, he's but the self-fulfilling prophecy of a failed administration." "Of course (Eric Sung continued on that memorable day) I and my many friends view things differently, because we stand for the cause of freedom of all Americans, including Hispanics, Afro-Americans and the rest of them. The miracle Obama stands for is the possibility of moving on from the failed policies of Republican short-sightedness. Instead of arguing for war and robbing to poor to pay for it, he wants universally accessible health care for every, single American instead. And that regardless of creed, skin-color, existing health issues and so on. Excitingly, he's planned to pay for this by cutting tax-breaks for wealthy Americans who have no need for them at all.


"Every time I page over a newspaper or switch to another news channel it seems to me that the tide of Obama support is growing exponentially. " He wants to re-establish regulations and protective measures to ensure that a future melt down will not be as dramatic and devastating ," I heard one excited editor enthuse. Another mentions that " he has a clear objective in Afghanistan to apprehend and eliminate the terrorist there, and an exit strategy - agreed to by Iraqi for exiting Iraq responsibly when the job is done ." "Eric Sung's right," I thought half musing to myself as I heard him speak that day. "He has a plan to pass social security on to future generations while simultaneously backing Medicaid. He'll not only engage in diplomacy with our worst enemies in order to resolve our differences there, but also strengthen relationships with our long-standing allies. Barack knows our greatest strengths lie in our ability to create peace through mutual dialogue and understanding - and not through military might as the Republicans would say. He also aims to release America from our our dependency on foreign oil, by replacing these imports with sustainable and renewable energy alternatives.
And thus is was that on that historic day I too said "I stand here today with Barack Obama not simply because this nation needs a new direction, but that we need a new leader, someone with the ability to inspire a world and unite a nation. History has taught us that words are powerful enough to unite and set a nation down a path of justice and equality - and how a great leader can inspire an entire generation and lead courageously in the face of crisis. Barack Obama possesses that special ability to both lead with actions and inspire with words. As a community activist, he worked on the causes of the poor and of the jobless, as a teacher, he taught constitutional law to aspiring lawyers; and as a legislator he reaches across the aisle to create real change in Illinois and in Washington. Through a tough primary he forged an alliance between blacks and whites, rich and poor, young and old, republicans and democrats. Through an election campaign, he has inspired a new generation to embrace and engage the political process," I exclaimed.
There is an old saying that opportunity may come knocking once in a lifetime. That time was then. It was our chance to make history. It was time that we made our presence felt in Washington and it was time we made our voices heard around the world. Yes, we could then and we can still. That memorable Friday I walked into an early voting station and enthusiastically cast my vote for Barack Obama as the next President of the United States of America. I have never been more proud of my country and of myself than on that day" On Martin Luther King Day a few months previously a young presidential hopeful addressed his audience as follows:


As of the 2000 census, Wichita had 2,531 residents distributed in 967 households,. The population density was four people per square mile. The racial set-up was 86.25% White , 0.08% Black or African American , 0.71% Native American , 0.08% Asian , 10.51% from other races , and 2.37% from two or more races. 18.41% of the population were Hispanic or Latino . No prize for guessing which group was wealthiest, and which ones were the most impoverished. The settlement of some three-thousand five-hundred people is sixty kilometers west-northwest of Kisumu on Lake Victoria (the provincial capital). It is described as a typical rural African village, with most families scraping by on small agricultural plots. Public facilities include a primary school and a high school, the land for both of which was donated by Barack Obama. There is also a small shopping centre accommodating a bar and shops. Recently a medical clinic has been added.

(named for the prime minister in the Majapahit Empire , and a national hero in Indonesia who unified the entire archipelago).


