Hoboken was originallyan island, surrounded by the Hudson River on the east and tidallands at the foot of the New Jersey Palisades on the west. It was aseasonal campsite in the territory of the Hackensack, a sub-groupof Lenni Lenape natives called Unami, whose totem was the turtle.Later called Delaware Indian, the Lenape are believed to have livedfor more than 2800 years on lands around and in-between the Hudsonand Delaware Rivers. anchored his ship, the Halve Maen (Half Moon) at Weehawken Cove onOctober 2, 1609 and together with his men The United NewNetherland Company was created to manage this new territory and inJune of 1623, New Netherland or Novo Belgio became a Dutchcolony. In 1630, Michael Pauw, aburgemeester (mayor) of Amsterdam and a director of the West IndiaCompany, received a land grant as patroon on the condition that hewould plant a colony of not fewer than fifty persons within fouryears on the west bank of what had been named the North River.Three Lenape sold the land that is was to become Hoboken (and partof Jersey City) for 80 fathoms (146 m) of wampum, 20 fathoms (37 m)of cloth, 12 kettles, six guns, two blankets, one double kettle andhalf a barrel of beer. These transactions, variously dated as July12, 1630 and November 22, 1630, represent the earliest knownconveyance for the area. Pauw (whose Latinized name is Pavonia)neglected to settle the land and he was obliged to sell hisholdings back to the Company in 1633. It was later acquired byHendrick Van Vorst, who leased part of the land to Aert Van Putten,a farmer. In 1643, north of what would be later known as CastlePoint, Van Putten built a house and a brewery, which is consideredthe first North Americabrewery. In series of Indian and Dutch raids and reprisals, VanPutten was killed and his buildings destroyed, and all residents ofPavonia (as the colony was known) were ordered back to NewAmsterdam. Deteriorating relations with the Lenape, its isolationas an island, or relatively long distance from New Amsterdam mayhave discouraged more settlement. In 1664, the English tookpossession of New Amsterdam with little or no resistance, and in1668 they confirmed a previous land patent of by Nicolas Verlett.In 1674-75 the area became part of East Jersey, and he province wasdivided into four administrative districts, Hoboken becoming partof Bergen County, where it remained until the creation of Hudson onFebruary 22, 1840. English-speaking settlers (some relocating fromNew England) interspersed with the Dutch, but it remained scarcelypopulated and agrarian. Eventually, the land came into thepossession of William Bayard, who originally supported therevolutionary cause, but became a Loyalist Tory after the fall ofNew York in 1776 when the city and surrounding areas, including thewest bank of the re-named Hudson River, were occupied by theBritish. At the end of the Revolutionary War, Bayard s property wasconfiscated by the Revolutionary Government of New Jersey. In 1784,the land described as "William Bayard's farm at Hoebuck" was boughtat auction by Colonel John Stevens for 18,360 poundssterling He may have usedthis lucrative source of income for testing his many mechanicalinventions. On October 11, 1811 his ship (theJuliana), began operation as the world's firststeam-powered ferrywith service between Manhattan and Hoboken. In 1832, Sybil's Caveopened as an attraction serving spring water, and after 1841 becamea legend, when Edgar Allan Poe wrote "The Mystery of Marie Roget"about an event that took place there. Later, at the end of 1880s,when the water was found to be contaminated, it was shut and in the1930s, filled with concrete.

Before his death in 1838, Stevens founded TheHoboken Land Improvement Company, which during the mid- andlate-19th century was managed by his heirs and laid out a regularsystem of streets, blocks and lots, constructed housing, anddeveloped manufacturing sites. In general, the housing consisted ofmasonry row houses of three to five stories, some of which surviveto the present day, as does the street grid. The advantages ofHoboken as a shipping port and industrial center becameapparent.

Hoboken was originally formedas an official township on April 9, 1849, from portions of NorthBergen Township. As the town grew in population and employment,many of Hoboken's residents saw a need to incorporate as afull-fledged city, and in a referendum held on March 29, 1855,ratified an Act of the New Jersey Legislature signed the previousday, and the City of Hoboken was born. In the subsequent election,Cornelius V. Clickener became Hoboken's first mayor. On March 15,1859, the Township of Weehawken was created from portions ofHoboken and North Bergen Township.

In 1870, based on a bequestfrom Edwin A. Stevens, Stevens Institute of Technology was foundedat Castle Point, that was a site of the Stevens family's formerestate. By the late 1800s, great shipping lines were using Hobokenas a terminal port, and the Delaware, Lackawanna & WesternRailroad (later the Erie Lackawanna Railroad) developed a railroadterminal at the waterfront. It was also during this time thatGerman immigrants, who had been settling in town during most of thecentury, became the predominant population group in the city, atleast partially due to its being a major destination port of theHamburg America Line. In addition to the primary industry ofshipbuilding, Hoboken became home to Keuffel and Esser'sthree-story factory and in 1884, to Tietjan and Lang Drydock (laterTodd Shipyards). Well-known companies that developed a majorpresence in Hoboken after the turn-of the-century included MaxwellHouse, Lipton Tea, and Hostess.

The first officially recorded game of baseballin US history took place in Hoboken in 1846 between KnickerbockerClub and New York Nine at Elysian Fields.

On June 19,1846 t he New York Nine defeated theKnickerbockers, 23 to 1 in four innings at Hoboken's Elysian Fieldsnear the current site of Elysian Park and the former Maxwell Housefacility.

Hoboken hadIrish, Italian and German enclaves. But it was perhaps the Germanculture that dominated until World War I. Hoboken was a center ofGerman culture, with German Churches, beer halls, news papers,social clubs etc. The large numbers of German immigrants living inHoboken earned it the name of "Little Bremen".

When the USA decided toenter World War I the Hamburg-American Line piers in Hoboken (andNew Orleans) were taken under eminent domain. Federal control ofthe port and anti-German sentiment led to part of the city beingplaced under martial law, and many Germans were forcibly moved toEllis Island or left the city altogether. Hoboken became the majorpoint of embarkation and more than three million soldiers, known as"doughboys", passed through the city. Their hope for an earlyreturn led to General Pershing's slogan, "Heaven, Hell orHoboken... by Christmas."

The Italians,es caping from the the war became the city'smajor ethnic group, with the Irish also having a strong presence.While the city experienced the Depression, jobs in the ships yardsand factories were still available, and the "tenements" were full.Middle-European Jews, mostly German-speaking, also made their wayto the city and established small businesses.

During those days, new administrativeorganizations were established, like the The Port Authority of NewYork and New Jersey (April 30, 1921) and new infrastructures werebuilt (The Holland Tunnel completed in 1927 and the Lincoln Tunnelcompleted in 1937), allowing for easier vehicular travel betweenNew Jersey and New York City, bypassing the waterfront.

The war provided a shot in the arm for Hobokenas the many industries located in the city were crucial to the wareffort. As men went off to battle, more women were hired in thefactories, some (most notably, Todd Shipyards), offering classesand other incentives to them. Though some returning service mentook advantage of GI housing bills, many with strong ethnic andfamilial ties chose to stay in town. During the fifties, theeconomy was still driven by Todd Shipyards, Maxwell House, LiptonTea, Hostess and Bethlehem Steel and companies with big plantsstill not inclined to invest in huge infrastructure elsewhere. Backto that time, The Unions were powerful and the pay for the workerwas good.

By the sixties, though, things began todisintegrate: turn-of-the century housing started to look shabbyand feel crowded, shipbuilding was cheaper overseas, andsingle-story plants surrounded by parking lots made manufacturingand distribution more economical than old brick buildings oncongested urban streets. The city appeared to be in the throes ofinexorable decline as industries sought (what had been) greenerpastures, port operations shifted to larger facilities on NewarkBay, and the car, truck and plane displaced the railroad and shipas the transportation modes of choice in the United States. ManyHobokenites headed to the suburbs, often the close-by ones inBergen and Passaic Counties, and real-estate values declined.Hoboken sank from its earlier incarnation as a lively port towninto a rundown condition and was often included in lists with otherNew Jersey cities experiencing the same phenomenon, such asPaterson, Elizabeth, Camden, and neighboring JerseyCity.

The old economic underpinnings were gone andnothing new seemed to be on the horizon. Attempts were made tostabilize the population by demolishing the so-called slums alongRiver Street and build subsidized middle-income housing atMarineview Plaza, and in midtown, at Church Towers. Heaps of longuncollected garbage and roving packs of semi-wild dogs were notuncommon sights. Though the city had seen better days, Hoboken wasnever abandoned. New infusions of immigrants, most notably PuertoRicans, kept the storefronts open with small businesses and housingstock from being abandoned, but there wasn't much work to be had.Washington Street, commonly called "the avenue", was never boardedup, and the tightly-knit neighborhoods remained home to many whowere still proud of their city. Stevens stayed a premieretechnology school, Maxwell House kept chugging away, and BethlehemSteel still housed sailors who were dry-docked on its piers.Italian-Americans and other came back to the "old neighborhood" toshop for delicatessen. Some streets were "iffy", but most were notpulled in at night.

The waterfront defined Hoboken as an archetypalport town and powered its economy from the mid-19th to mid-20thcentury, by which time it had become essentially industrial (andmostly inaccessible to the general public). The large productionplants of Lipton Tea and Maxwell House, and the drydocks ofBethlehem Steel dominated the northern portion for many years. Thesouthern portion (which had been a US base of the Hamburg-AmericanLine) was seized by the federal government under eminent domain atoutbreak of World War I, after which it became (with the rest ofthe Hudson County) a major East Coast cargo-shipping port. On theWaterfront, consistently listed among the five best American filmsever, was shot in Hoboken, dramatically highlighting the rough andtumble lives of longshoremen and the infiltration of unions byorganized crime.

With the construction of the interstate highwaysystem and containerization shipping facilities (particularly atPort Newark-Elizabeth Marine Terminal), the docks became obsolete,and by the 1970s were more or less abandoned. A large swathe ofRiver Street, known as the Barbary Coast for its taverns andboarding houses (which had been home for many dockworkers, sailors,merchant marines, and other seamen) was leveled as part of an urbanrenewal project. Though control of the confiscated area had beenreturned to the city in the 1950s, complex lease agreements withthe Port Authority gave it little influence on its management. Inthe 1980s, the waterfront dominated Hoboken politics, with variouscivic groups and the city government engaging in sometimes nasty,sometimes absurd politics and court cases. By the 1990s, agreementswere made with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,various levels of government, Hoboken citizens, and privatedevelopers to build commercial and residential buildings and "openspaces" (mostly along the bulkhead and on the foundation ofun-utilized Pier A).

The northern portion, which had remained inprivate hands, has also been re-developed. While most of thedry-dock and production facilities were razed to make way formid-rise apartment houses, many sold as investment "condos", somebuildings were renovated for adaptive re-use (notably the TeaBuilding, formerly home to Lipton Tea, and the Machine House, homeof the Hoboken Historic Museum). Zoning requires that newconstruction follow the street grid and limits the height of newconstruction to retain the architectural character of the city andopen sight-lines to the river. Downtown, Sinatra Park and SinatraDrive honor the man most consider to be Hoboken's most famous son,while uptown the name Maxwell recalls the factory with its smell ofroasting coffee wafting over town and its huge neon "Good to theLast Drop" sign, so long a part of the landscape. The midtownsection is dominated by the serpentine rock outcropping atop ofwhich sits Stevens Institute of Technology (which also owns some,as yet, un-developed land on the river). At the foot of the cliffis Sybil's Cave (where 19th century day-trippers once came to "takethe waters" from a natural spring), long sealed shut, though plansfor its restoration are in place. The promenade along the riverbank is part of the Hudson River Waterfront Walkway, astate-mandated master plan to connect the municipalities from theBayonne Bridge to George Washington Bridge and provide contiguousunhindered access to the water's edge and to create an urban linearpark offering expansive views of the Hudson with the spectacularbackdrop of the New York skyline.

During the late 1970s and 1980s, the citywitnessed a speculation spree, fueled by transplanted New Yorkersand others who bought many turn-of-the-century brownstones inneighborhoods that the still solid middle and working classpopulation had kept intact and by local and out-of-town real-estateinvestors who bought up late 19th century apartment houses oftenconsidered to be tenements. Hoboken experienced a wave of fires,some of which proved to be arson. Applied Housing, a real-estateinvestment firm, took advantage of US government incentives torenovate "sub-standard" housing and receive subsidized rentalpayments (commonly know as Section 8), which enabled somelow-income, displaced, and disabled residents to move within town.Hoboken attracted artists, musicians, upwardly-mobile commuters(known as yuppies), and "bohemian types" interested in thesocio-economic possibilities and challenges of a bankrupt New Yorkand who valued the aesthetics of Hoboken's residential, civic andcommercial architecture, its sense of community, and relatively(compared to Lower Manhattan) cheaper rents, and quick, train hopaway. Hoboken became a "hip" place to live. Amid this socialupheaval, so-called "newcomers" displaced some of the "old-timers"in the eastern half of the city.

This gentrification resembled thatof parts of Brooklyn and downtown Jersey City and Manhattan's EastVillage, (and to a lesser degree, SoHo and TriBeCa, whichpreviously had not been residential). The initial presence ofartists and young people changed the perception of the place suchthat others who would not have considered moving there beforeperceived it as an interesting, safe, exciting, and eventually,desirable. The process continued as many suburbanites, transplantedAmericans, internationals, and immigrants (most focused onopportunities in NY/NJ region and proximity to Manhattan) began tomake the "Jersey" side of the Hudson their home, and the"real-estate boom" of the era encouraged many to seek investmentopportunities. Empty lots were built on, tenements becamecondominiums. Hoboken felt the impact of the destruction of theWorld Trade Center intensely, many of its newer residents havingworked there. Re-zoning encouraged new construction on formerindustrial sites on the waterfront and the traditionally moreimpoverished low-lying west side of the city where, in concert withHudson-Bergen Light Rail and New Jersey State land-use policy,transit villages are now being promoted. Hoboken became, andremains, a focal point in American rediscovery of urban living, andis often used as staging ground for those wishing to move to theNew York/New Jersey metropolitan region. Moreover, Hoboken's bars, restaurants,public transportation, and reasonably priced housing -- not tomention, as always, it's proximity to NYC - make it THE place tolive. Moreover, There are several Annual events inHoboken, like: Hoboken House Tour (Spring)-an inside view ofprivate spaces of historical, architectural or aestheticinterest Hoboken International FilmFestival Hoboken Studio Tour (Fall)-open house at manystudios of artists working in town Hoboken Arts and Music Festival (Spring andFall)-music, arts and crafts on waterfront and WashingtonStreet It should be wonderful, in fact ita ttracts hundreds ofpeople from all over New Jersey each year and it is renowned forits delicious corned beef dinner, great music and packed dancefloor. This year party was once again feature the rollicking soundsof ound the House,a crowd-pleasing Irish band known for its abilityto mix lively Irish music with danceable standards and poptunes. Hoboken FlipCup Feast of Saint Anthony St Ann's Feast-almost 100 yearsold Movies Under the Stars (Summer)-an outdoorfilm series Eddie's! The secret of this place are fresh,all-natural ingredients. Then he mixes them with a secret array ofherbs and spices to conjure-up his mysterious, mystical sauces.There are no animal products, fats, or oils. Thecurrent Hoboken High School was built in the mid-1960s. Prior tothat time, A. J. Demarest High School, dedicated in the autumn of1911, served as the city's high school. When the current highschool was built, Demarest became a junior High School (grades8-9), and it is currently a Vocational High School in the district.The first principal of Hoboken HS was Tom Gaynor - Boys wererequired to wear button down shirts with ties and a jacket orsweater - long hair was frowned on by Mr. Gaynor. The student bodyof the school is 66% Hispanic, 19% Black, 14% White, 1% Asian, and1% Native American. The International Baccalaureate Diploma Programis a comprehensive and rigorous two-year curriculum, leading toexaminations, for students in grades eleven and twelve. The generalobjectives of the IB are to provide students with a balancededucation; to facilitate geographic and cultural mobility; and topromote international understanding through a shared academicexperience. In the 30 years since its founding, the IB diploma hasbecome a symbol of academic integrity and intellectual promise. Thestudent who satisfies its demands demonstrates a strong commitmentto learning, both in terms of the mastery of the subject contentand in the development of the skills and discipline necessary forsuccess in a competitive world. IB courses are college preparatorycourses within high schools complete with the expectations ofincreased reading and oral and written reports. The final exams areevaluated by a panel of professors from around the world who areexperts in their respective fields. Courses involve an internalassessment factor requiring teachers to submit essays and studenttapes for grading to external examiners.