Oneof the areas where diversity is emphasized as a good thing is thepolitical arena. In the realm of politics, the term diversity (or that ofbeing diverse) is used to provide descriptions for politicalentities (such as cities, neighborhood, student bodies, nations,etc.) with members who have identifiable differences in theirbackgrounds or ways of living. The use of the term diversity may includedifferences in racial or ethnicdescriptions , physical disabilities, age,religion, gender, philosophy, socioeconomic background, age, gender identity , religion ,philosophy, physicalabilities , socioeconomic background, mentalhealth and intelligence. Political and cultural identities shouldalso be considered when political diversity is the topic. In a way,it is for the benefit of a society to maintain diversity becausethe different characteristics allow innovations of a community atvarious levels.
Biodiversity cannotbe defined in a single manner. In the field of biology, it may beperceived of as the number of genes, species, and ecosystems in aregion. This biological definition includes genetic diversity,which is the diversity of genes within a species, speciesdiversity, or the diversity of the species within a certain habitator region, and ecosystem diversity, or the diversity of habitatswithin a region.
There are several waysto ensure that diversity is promoted in terms of managerial actsbeing conducted. Different diversity development performancemeasures can include the following steps (but are not limitedto): Manager may seek out and attend diversitydevelopment training offered by reliable institutions who arepromoting diversity. Training may include specific courses whichare helpful in the process. These course may focus on any of thefollowing: Cultivating a Diverse Workforce, or Diversity:Disability Culture & Awareness, as well as conflict resolution,diversity recruitment, diversity conferences, multiculturalnetworking, etc. Manager may also opt to establish andimplement a project on diversity development program for the workunit that is assigned to him. The manager works with the employeesthat he is managing in order to develop a program and schedule forimplementing programs diversity development activities within thework unit that he supervises. The programs on diversity hasspecific action steps which should be followed, measurable outcomesand timelines to be able to evaluate the result of all the effortsto create diversity. A method for measuring program effectivenessis determined by means of proper evaluatory mechanisms. Manager should be able to posses the skillsand become effective at recruiting, hiring, promoting andmaintaining a diverse workforce. This is also not just for theeasier management of the manager but also for greater effectivenessof the company. The manager must work with HR in order to instructthe employees working for the HR to hire a diverse set of peopleand not just a homogenous set of employees. A manager should alsobe able to tie up with other networks as appropriate and necessaryto assist and aid in the recruitment process and expand thediversity of the applicant pool. A promotion campaign may alsostart not just with the interview process itself but on campaignspromoting job opening of the company. The manager must ensure thatthe interview panels are diverse and trained by training programsfocused on cross-cultural interviewing techniques. The managershould effective in mentoring all employees with career planningsupport. The manager should imbibe a sense of positive viewregarding diversity. In this way, his subordinates will be able toinherit this positive sense toward diversity. Manager should also exert effort to integratediversity development into performance of tasks, planning of futureprojects and evaluation of the past projects conducted by the team.The manager holds his staff accountable for participating inactivities that support these efforts toward the creation of a morediverse environment in the business. The manager holds staffaccountable for undesirable behaviors that are exclusionary andoffensive to others within the groups or even for those who areoutside it. Manager models and serves as the leader inthe creation of a positive and welcoming attitude regardingdiversity. In deeds and words the manager should be able tocommunicate that diversity is indeed an asset for the company fromwhich all staff and customers benefit. He should be able toemphasize the pros of diversity which are able to outweigh the consof it, should there be any. The manager must be able to includediversity on conversations in staff meetings and even in personalconversations he conducts with his subordnates. The manager shouldbe able to regularly include diversity discussion in communicationswith staff. In this way, the employees will have a reasonableperception that the manager is supporting this kind ofset-up. Manager provides opportunities and chancesfor staff to participate in trainings supporting diversity andother diversity related events. The manager also seeks out and/ orcreates opportunities for his subordinates and employees to receivetraining on a variety of diversity related issues. Training willmake the employees realize among themselves the importance ofdiversity in the workplace Manager utilizes and uses the diversitywithin the workforce by the incorporation of the diverseperspectives into every business decision that the industry seeksto create and make. The manager routinely seeks out the views andperspectives of all employees. The manager uses a variety ofstrategies and methods for ensuring that the suggestions of theemployees are elicited, acknowledged and utilized in a way thatwould be beneficial to the employees. Manager creates and maintains a workenvironment that is respectful to personal views of the workers andaccepting of diversity. The manager is able to set clearexpectations for expected reasonable behaviors and clear andcertain methods for reporting inappropriate behaviors.Inappropriate behaviors toward diversity should not be toleratedbecause it may be detrimental to the overall productivity of thecompany. There should be no discrimination among employees in spiteof the fact that there surely will be striking differences betweenand among them. Manager works to assure that the company isable to continue providing culturally competent client services. Inthis way, the company remains strong if the clients's trust ismaintained by the company. Manager sets tone and norm for creatinga welcoming workplace and environment; that is not discriminatory.The manager also assures that service delivery is provided in aculturally competent way. Services should be able to acknowledgethe differences of various cultures and still be able to work inspite of the differences. The manager assures that printed materialare available in alternate format and in different languages;bi-lingual services available and facilities are accessible for allclients. In this way, language and cultural barriers areeffectively addressed by the company.