Dogsadopted from shelters are often referred to as shelter dogs orpound puppies; dogs adopted from rescue organizations are oftencalled rescue dogs. Shelters have put together informationalwebsites to help the public choose the right dog for theirfamily.

Pets are taken to animal shelters for manyreasons. Breeding: Breeders are a leading cause ofoverpopulation because they usually produce more pets than they cansell and often produce pets that do not fit their desired breedingspecifications, and must be gotten rid of. Death: Owner dies and no one in the familywants to (or can) keep the pet. Changed circumstances: Financial or livingarrangements change drastically and people feel that they can nolonger provide an appropriate home for the pet. This might alsoinclude someone having to move to a new living situation where petsare not allowed. Second thoughts: A pet was purchased after thespur of the moment decision or as a gift (frequently forChristmas). Some time afterward, owners discover that caring forthe pet is much more work than expected, or requires more space orexercise than they are prepared to give. Lost pet: Pet leaves home or cannot find itsway back, and the owner does not succeed in finding it. Health: Severe health problems make itimpossible to have a dog in the house or impossible for the ownerto care for the dog. Practice babies: Shelters use this term foranimals that have been adopted by couples, and who are thenabandoned when the couple splits up, or when a real baby comesalong and they no longer have the time or inclination to care fortheir pet. Moving across borders: People leave thecountry; quarantine laws in some countries can be traumatic to petsand owners, so to avoid the stress, the pet is surrendered to ananimal shelter. Allergies: Many owners claim to have developedallergies to their pets, or that their children have developedallergies to their pets.

These are some of the many ways in which peopledeal with a dog they can't cope with. However there are some evenmore extreme actions that take place. Some people have their peteuthanized also known as having them put down. Many veterinarianswill no longer agree to do this as it is considered to be anunethical use of their resources unless the animal is old an inpain. Others argue that euthanasia is a more humane option thanleaving a pet in a cage for very long periods of time but this isridiculous. If an animal is going to haveto be kept in a cage for a long time, their owner should not havetried to get a pet that requires so much care. All animals deserveto live their lives in adherence to their basic needs. For dogsthis is frequent exercise and a home that can provide the propermental stimulation. Other people simply release the pet into thewild or otherwise abandon it, with the expectation that it will beable to take care of itself or that it will be found and adopted.More often, these pets succumb to hunger, weather, traffic, orcommon and treatable health problems. To leave a dog, that camehome expecting to live with you and be loved by you, alone in thewild desperately trying to feed itself and find somewhere warm tosleep is the most appalling lack of basic morality. But not onlythat it is an insult to your dog, the one you chose but gave up onwhen it got too hard. This is unacceptable whatever the situation.There are always other options open to a caring dog owner. Somepeople euthanize pets because of terminal illnesses or injuries,while others even do it for common health problems that theycannot, or will not, pay for treating. More responsible owners willtake the pet to a shelter, or call a rescue organization, where itwill be cared for properly until a home can be found. Homes cannotalways be found, however, and euthanasia is often used for theexcess animals to make room for newer pets, unless the place has ano-kill policy. The Humane Society of the United States estimatesthat 3-4 million dogs and cats are euthanized each year in the USbecause of a lack of homes. Animal protection advocates urge peopleto spay or neuter their pets and to adopt instead of buying animalsin order to reduce the number of animals who have to beeuthanized. To help lower the number of animalseuthanized, some shelters have developed this no-kill policy. Theseshelters keep their animals as long as it takes to find them newhomes. City shelters rarely have this policy because of the largenumber of animals they receive. No-kill shelters are usually run bygroups that have volunteers or individuals with enough space tofoster pets until a permanent home can be found. However, many ofthese groups and individuals have a finite number of spacesavailable. This means they will not take in new animals unless aspace opens up, although they will often take back pets that theyhave adopted out previously The central issue inthe adoption of a pet is whether a new owner can provide a safe,secure, permanent home for the pet. Many shelters, pounds, andrescue organizations refuse to supply animals to people whom theyjudge cannot supply the animal with a suitable home. A new owner migh t alsoface training challenges with a pet who has been neglected orabused. In those cases, the owner must be extra patient with theanimal and provide it with the right care to help the pet overcomethe past.

One problem shelters are fighting to overcomeis what they term "Big Black Dog syndrome". Big black dogs (BBDs)are consistently the hardest dogs to place even if they refriendly, well trained, and in perfect health. This may be due to anumber of factors, including fear stigma against certain breedtypes, attraction to ads and the fact that black dogs do notphotograph as well as lighter coated ones, and the fact that blackdogs are often portrayed as aggressive in film and on television.Organizations have started campaigns to educate the public aboutBBD syndrome.

Hundreds of thousandsof dogs suffer in puppy mills in this country. The dogs areprisoners of greed. They are locked in small cages. They freeze inthe winter and swelter in the summer. The dogs never get out oftheir prisons. They are bred over and over again until they die.The only way to free them from the misery of these horridpuppymills is to eliminate the demand for puppies by refusing tobuy a puppy in a pet store and boycotting those pet stores thatsell puppies. When people stop buying puppies in pet stores, thepuppy mills will go out of business and the misery will end. Thestate and federal governments do not enforce the laws to protectthe dogs. The commercial breeders and brokers have huge well-fundedlobbying efforts. Please join this fight to free the prisoners ofgreed. The only person who is going to make a difference for thedogs suffering in puppy mills is you. You, the people, can freethem from their puppy mill prisons.

