Atari Inc. is now thename of a French-owned game software company. The original companyAtari was a pioneer in arcade games, home video game consoles, andpersonal computers, and its dominance in those areas made it themajor force in the computer entertainment industry in the early tomid 1980s. The brand has also been used at various times by AtariGames, a separate company split off in 1984.

The name Atari comes from the ancient boardgame Go, where "atari" is a Japanese term that applies to moveswhich threaten to capture opponent's stones. It may be used duringpolite games as a courtesy to make one's opponent aware of thepotential threat. It is similar to "check" in chess.

Designed by George Oppermanin late 1972, the Atari logo was meant to serve a dual purpose.First an foremost it represents a stylized letter "A" to stand for"Atari". However, the stylized "A" was also meant to representAtari's initial claim to fame - PONG The two side pieces of theAtari symbol represent two opposing video game players, with thecenter line of the PONG court in the middle.

Atari ran into problems inthe early 1980s. Its home computer, video game console, and arcadedivisions operated independently of one another and rarelycooperated. Faced with fierce competition and price wars in thegame console and home computer markets, Atari was never able tofollow on the success of the 2600. In 1982, Atari releaseddisappointing versions of two highly publicized games, Pac-Man andE.T., causing a pileup of unsold inventory and depressing prices.Also in 1982, Atari settled a court case with Activision,officially opening the 2600 to third-party development. The marketquickly became saturated, depressing prices further. In addition,in December 1982, Atari executives Ray Kassar and Dennis Groth wereinvestigated for insider trading (later found to be false). LarryEmmons, employee No.3, retired in 1982. He was head of research anddevelopment of the small group of talented engineers in GrassValley, California. The Atari 5200 game console, released as anext-generation followup to the 2600, was based on the Atari 800computer (but was incompatible with Atari 800 game cartridges), andits sales never met the company's expectations. It is rumored thatin 1983, in response to a massive number of returned orders fromdistributors, Atari buried millions of unsold game cartridges (thebulk of them consisting of two titles--Pac_Man andE.T._the_Extra-Terrestrial) in a New Mexico desert landfill. HowardScott Warshaw, the programmer of E.T. and several other Atari 2600games, questions the accuracy of this urban legend.

Still, Atari held aformidable position in the world video game market. They were thenumber one console maker in every market except Japan. That marketbelonged to Nintendo, who had released their first game console,the Famicom (known to the rest of the world as the NES) in 1983.The system took Japan by storm, and Nintendo began to look to othermarkets. They approached Atari and offered a licensing deal - Atariwould build and sell the system, paying Nintendo a royalty. Thedeal was in the works, and the two companies tentatively decided tosign the agreement at the 1983 Summer CES. Unfortunately, at thatsame show Coleco was showing their new Adam computer, and thedisplay unit was running Donkey Kong. But Atari owned the rights topublish Donkey Kong for computers. Atari CEO Ray Kassar had a fit,accusing Nintendo of double dealing with the Donkey Kong license.Nintendo in turn tore into Coleco. In the coming month, Ray Kassarwas forced to leave Atari, and executives involved in the Famicomdeal were forced to start over again from scratch.

These problems were followed by the infamous videogame crash of 1983, which caused losses that totaled more than $500million. Warner's stock price slid from $60 to $20 and the companybegan searching for a buyer for its troubled division. As forNintendo, Atari could no longer afford the Famicom deal, andeventually Nintendo would be forced to go it alone.

In July 1984, Warner sold the home computing andgame console divisions of Atari to Jack Tramiel, the recentlyousted founder of Atari competitor Commodore International, underthe name Atari Corp. for $240 million. Warner retained the arcadedivision, continuing it under the name Atari Games.

Under Tramiel's ownership, Atari Corp. abandoned thegame console market to concentrate on aggressively priced homecomputers, releasing the 8-bit Atari XE series and the 16-bit AtariST line in 1985. Then, in 1986, Atari re-released the Atari 2600and released its previously cancelled Atari 7800 console. Atarirebounded, producing a $25 million profit that year. The Atari STline with the innovative GEM operating system proved moderatelysuccessful, ultimately selling more than 4 million units. It wasespecially popular among musicians, as it had built in MIDI ports.Still, its closest competitor in the marketplace, the Amiga,outsold it 1.5 to 1. Atari eventually released a line ofinexpensive IBM PC compatibles as well.

Atari also released Atari Lynx, a handheld consolewith color graphics, in 1989 to critical acclaim. However, ashortage of parts kept the system from being released nationwidefor the 1989 Christmas season and as a result, the Lynx lostmarketshare to Nintendo's Game Boy, which had only a black andwhite display but was widely available. Also in 1989, Atari Corp.sued Nintendo for $250 million, alleging it had an illegalmonopoly. Atari lost.

As the fortunes of Atari's ST and PC compatiblecomputers faded, consoles and software again became the company'smain focus. In 1993, Atari released its last console, the Jaguar.After a period of initial success, it, too, failed to meetexpectations. Although it was more powerful than competing consolesfrom the likes of Sony and Sega in some ways, it was also moreexpensive and more difficult to program. Atari's competitorsoffered larger software libraries and advertised much moreheavily.

By 1996, a series of successful lawsuits followed byprofitable investments had left Atari with millions of dollars inthe bank, but the failure of the Lynx and Jaguar left Atari withoutany products to sell. In addition, Tramiel and his family wantedout. The result was a rapid succession of changes in ownership. InJuly 1996, Atari merged with JTS Corporation, a short-lived makerof hard disk drives, and the Atari name largely disappeared fromthe market.

Although the original Atari ceased to exist, a largeamount of underground development remains for Atari's game systemsand computers of the 1970s and 1980s, and much of the ClassicGaming Expo's attention, which has existed since 1997, focuses onAtari.

In March 1998, JTS sold the Atari name and assets toHasbro Interactive for $5 million, less than a fifth of what WarnerCommunications had paid 22 years earlier. This transactionprimarily involved the brand and intellectual property; thedevelopment headquarters and design teams during this time werebought by Midway. The brand name changed hands again in December2000 when French software publisher Infogrames took over HasbroInteractive.

In October 2001, Infogrames announced that it was"reinventing" the Atari brand with the launch of three new games.On May 7, 2003, Infogrames officially changed its name to Atari,Inc.

