TOILET BOWL SHAPES

Here are the different bowl shapes you may consider when buyingyour toilet:




COMPOSTING TOILET

A composting toilet is a self-contained unit (notconnected to a septic or sewer system) which breaks-down anddehydrates human waste to a compost which can be added tosoils.

Composting toilets comein models which use a little water or no water at all, and inelectric (heated and power-vented) models and non-electric models.Some models include electro-mechanical mixers which mix waste inwith a mulch product to speed and improve the composting process.Properly designed and installed the toilet is vented so that thereare no abnormal toilet odors. Periodically the compost must beemptied and on occasion toilet components arecleaned.



The toilet manufacturermay recommend or provide a specific mulching product to aid thecomposting product and probably to aid indeodorizing.
Smaller composting units, especially smallerunits which do not use heaters and aerators, because they riskunwanted liquid accumulation, insects, and nitrification of thewaste, will require more maintenance and care than units whichprovide an aerator fan, heater, and compost mixer.



If you have never installed atoilet before, then this guide will take you step-by-step throughthe process. You will find the process to be much easier than youhad ever imagined it would be.



PartsNecessary For Your Toilet Installation

You will need to get the toilet bowl, toilet tank, toilet flangebolts, and we recommend a kitchen/bath silicone caulk. If you haveuneven floors or tile floors, you might also need some rubbershims. Since the wax bowl ring only costs a couple of bucks, Iwould recommend that you replace it too. You should get the onewith the plastic flange attached to it.

Pulling Up Your Old Toilet

The first thing you want to do when you are pulling your old toiletup is to cut off the water supply. In most cases, you will be ableto do that from a water shut-off valve at the floor level belowyour toilet. Once you have closed off the water supply, then youwill want to loosen the water supply line where it enters the baseof your toilet tank.

You will be able to flush out most of the water in your toilet tankand basin, but you will never get all of the water out. So, it isgood practice to have an old towel lying around to soak up thesmall amount of water that will spill when you take out your oldtoilet.

You will want to detach your toilet seat and toilet lid before youhaul your old toilet out of the house. That is done by looseningthe nuts directly below the hinge on your seat, from below theporcelain of the toilet.

At the floor level, you will see two plastic caps that will need tobe removed so that you can get to the nuts below. Once you haveremoved these nuts, your toilet should come straight up.

Preparing The Area For Your New Toilet

When you pull up the old toilet, you will find a wax bowl ring onthe floor.

This is the only part of the task that can get messy. When you pullup the wax ring, you might have some of the wax stuck to the floor.You will need to scrape up this old wax. Your old towel comes inhandy here as well, since you can use it to clean the wax from yourscraper, so you don't have to get the wax on your hands.

If you are putting new toilet flange bolts in, now is the time todo that. The heads of the bolts have two flat sides and two roundedsides. Turn them sideways to get them into the flange, and thenturn them where the cornered sides are under the lip of the flange.With your new flange bolts set, there will be a plastic piece witha cross cut from the middle. You should slide this over the boltand push is towards the floor. This will keep your flange boltsfrom sliding out of position.

Prepare Your Toilet Bowl For Placement

Take your toilet bowl out of the box, and place it upside down onthe floor.

At this point, you should put the level on the floor to make surethat you are dealing with a level surface. If you are not dealingwith a level surface, you will need to use the rubber shims tostabilize your toilet once it is put it in place. You can usemasking tape to fasten the rubber shims to the base circumferenceof your toilet.

If you have a tile floor, you will want to use the rubber shims tokeep your toilet from moving or swiveling after you have set it inplace. Any movement of the toilet bowl after you have set it inplace might break the seal of your wax ring. If your seal isbroken, you will run the risk of having sewer gas leak back intoyour bathroom, or you will find that your toilet leaks uncleanwater onto your floor.

Once you have applied the shims to the bottom of your toilet, youwill want to place the wax bowl ring on the base of your toilet.The plastic part that drops below the wax is supposed to go intothe hole in your floor that leads to the sewage drain, so apply itto the base of your toilet bowl facing away from the toilet.

The last step you will want to take before affixing the toilet bowlto the floor is to put some kind of marker down to show you wherethe toilet flange bolts are located. The last thing you want to bedoing is to be hovering the toilet above the floor wondering wherethe bolts are so that you can drop the toilet in the right spot thefirst time. Whether you put a couple screwdrivers on the floorpointing to the flange bolts or put a pencil mark on the floor isup to you, so long as you leave yourself a way to make a visualalignment from above the toilet.

Executing Your Bowl Plan

Once you get through this next step, it is all down hill from here.It is now time to flip your toilet bowl over and then to slowlyguide it onto the toilet flange bolts.

If you put good markers on the floor to remind you where the boltsare located, you should be able to put the holes over the bolts onyour very first try. From personal experience, I can tell you thatnot marking off where your bolts are located will lead to manyheadaches.

Once you have your toilet bowl on the floor, gently press it to thefloor. Sitting on your new toilet is often a good choice. If yousense a wobble in your toilet, you may need to affix additionalrubber shims to level your toilet. You do not want to lift thetoilet back off the floor unless you have another wax bowl ringhandy. I also learned that from the school of hard knocks.

At this point, you will want to put the plastic piece with thesquare hole onto your bolt on top of the porcelain, then put thewasher on, and finally start your nuts on the bolts.
As you put on the nuts, twist them down to just above theporcelain, and then turn each just a few turns before going to theother side. The point is that each side needs to be tightened justa little bit at a time. This is important because you do not wantto over-tighten the nuts causing the flange or porcelain tobreak.

Attaching The Toilet Tank

In most cases, there will be a rubber gasket attached to the bottomof the tank. Just slip the tank onto the top of the toilet bowl,lining up the three holes on the tank with the three holes on thebowl.

If the tank did not have a rubber gasket on the bottom of it thatalso surrounded the boltholes, the tank will come with rubbergaskets to be affixed to your bolts before sliding them into theholes from inside the toilet tank. Just slide the bolts into theholes from the top.

Put your level on top of the tank to help you guide the tightnessof your nuts. You will want to make sure that when you are done,your toilet tank is level.

Put the washers on the bottom side of the bolts, and then start thenuts on your bolts. Once again, you will want to tighten each ofthe three nuts a little bit at a time, so that you do not break thebowl or the tank. Use your flat head screwdriver to hold the boltin place as you tighten the nuts.

Final Steps...

We only have three easy steps remaining. First, you need toreattach the water supply to the fitting on the bottom of the tank.Do turn on the water to make sure that you do not have anyleaks.

Next, put a bead of your kitchen/bathroom silicone caulk around thefront and sides of your toilet. You want to leave the back open inthe event that the wax seal breaks at some point. Leaving that areaopen will allow you to notice a problem, before damage is done tothe floor under the toilet.

And finally, you will want to put your toilet seat back on yourtoilet.

Ready For Use

You are now ready to use your new toilet. Most people can completethis job in just under an hour.
