The dinosaurs were among the most successful animals ever to live on the Earth and their reigncontinued for over 100 million years.

Dinosaurs became extinct 66 million years ago at the end of the Cretaceous Period. The Late Cretaceous dinosaurs from the San Juan Basin were some of the last to have lived on Earth. They are important the world over because of the information they provide scientists about the cause of dinosaur extinction.

Fossils are broadly broken up into two types. Body fossils and trace fossils. Body fossils are pieces of an animal such as fossilised bones or teeth. Trace fossils are fossilized actions such as footprints, skin impressions or egg shells. Excepting the southeastern corner, d inosaur fossils have been found all over New Mexico and so it is of importance to the paleontological world . New Mexico is also unique in that it preserves both body fossils and trace fossils of Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous dinosaurs. Between 225 and 66 million years ago dinosaurs lived in New Mexico . This means there were dinosaurs in New Mexico in the Late Triassic and the entire Jurassic and Cretaceous periods. The first fossils collected in New Mexico was during the 1880s. The fossil records of New Mexico cover nearly the entire timespan of the dinosaurs right up to their extinction at the end of the Cretaceous.

New Mexico has the best record of Triassic dinosaurs of all the states of America. This includes teeth of Revueltosaurus , bones of Eucoelophysis and skeletons of Coelophysis as well as fragmentary skeletons of other dinosaurs and plenty of dinosaur tracks too. Some of the oldest known fossils in the whole world have been found in New Mexico. Coelophysis , the official state fossil, is one of the best-preserved dinosaurs in the world both in completeness and also in volume, as literally h undreds of Coelophysis skeletons were found in Rio Arriba County at Ghost Ranch in the 1940s. Coelophysis was a carnivorous dinosaur measuring about two to three meters in length. It was one of the first dinosaurs on Earth and is the most well known of the Late Triassic dinosaurs.

Dinosaur fossils, including the Coelophysis skeletons can be seen in many place in New Mexico, such as the Geology Museum of the University of New Mexico, the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, Clayton Lake State Park near Clayton , the Ruth Hall Museum of Paleontology at Ghost Ranch near Abiquiu, the Mesalands Dinosaur Museum in Tucumcari, and the Museum of the New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources in Socorro. Dinosaur fossils from new Mexico are now in museums the world over.

Scientists from the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science made a discovery in 1988 near Tucumcari of a new Late Triassic dinosaur. It was a vegetarian dinosaur measurring two meters long and they called it Revueltosaurus , after Revuelto Creek in Quay County. A second species of Revueltosaurus from central New Mexico and eastern Arizona was also discovered some time later. The New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science also houses a Eucoelophysis , a dinosaur similar to Coelophysis but found in slightly older rocks in Rio Arriba County. The study of the Triassic dinosaurs of New Mexico is an ongoing and continual process.

If you're interested in dinosaur footprints then Eastern New Mexico is the place to be. There are dozens of footprint sites where you can see the tracks of theropod dinosaurs , prosauropods and even Triassic sauropods .

The Jurassic dinosaur bones from New Mexico are 140-150 million years old. Jurassic fossils have only ever been discovered in the northern half of the state where Jurassic rocks of the Morrison Formation are exposed. Seismosaurus and Saurophaganax, two huge Jurassic dinosaurs were discovered in New Mexico .

Seismosaurus, at 33 meters long is one of the longest dinosaurs in the world and was discovered in 1979 near San Ysidro in Sandoval County. The sauropod looks like a massive Diplodocus. You can see the actual fossil and a life sized reconstruction of Seismosaurusis at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History.

The best Morrison Formation dinosaur quarry in New Mexico is the Peterson quarry on BLM land in central New Mexico. The Petersons, a father and son team discovered the site in the 1960s and started excavating in 1989. Thousands of Volunteers have collectively spent thousands of hours excavating dinosaur bones and teeth. The best find from the Peterson quarry has to be the part skeleton of the massive theropod Saurophaganax, a huge 12 meters long. You can also see this part skeleton and a full size cast of it in the New Mexico Museum of Natural History.

100-million-year-old footprints in Harding and Union counties give us evidence of Cretaceous dinosaurs in New Mexico. The footprints of ornithopod dinosaurs show a close relation to duck-billed dinosaurs. The best place to view the footprints is at Clayton Lake state Park, where you can see over 500 dinosaur footprints exposed at the dam spillway.

The best-known dinosaurs found in New Mexico were discovered in the San Juan Basin of the northwestern part of the state in rock 66-75 million-years-old. There is a special array of these Late Cretaceous dinosaur fossils in the Bisti/De-na-zin Federal Wilderness Areas south of Farmington. The New Mexico Museum of Natural History workswith the United States Bureau of Land Management and has special permits to excavate and house the fossils found on these sites.

The Braceasaur was the dinosaur that had the smallest brain was. His brain was just the size of a walnut.

Sauropods are quadrupedal herbivores such as the Diplodocus and they appeared in the Late Triassic period. They had very long necks and tails, small skulls and brains, and erect limbs. Their nostrils were located high up on the skulls, sometimes very close to the eyes. Some of the later sauropods also had some basic body armor.

Sauropods were geographically widespread, Bones and footprints of sauropods have been found in every continent other than Antarctica. They are also one of the most long-lived groups of dinosaurs, spanning around 100 million years, from the Lower Jurassic to the Upper Cretaceous periods.

So what happened to the dinosaurs? Well as dinosaurs lived on earth for such a long period of time, many species became exinct well before the mass extinction at the end of Cretaceous period. It is unknown what exactly happened to wipe them all out completely. Some scientists say a disease was the cause, others believe the weather became colder and they died. Others believe there was a massive impact on the earth that killed them all It is thought that the Triceratops was the last dinosaur to become extinct.

