When people talk about coffee, they talk about Starbucks. When they talk about meeting over a cup of coffee, they go to Starbucks. When they mean Starbucks, they talk about different coffee flavors that satisfy their cravings for coffee.

However, before we indulge ourselves to a lavishing Starbucks coffee serving, let's find out first what constitute this famous coffee store in the whole world -- without coffee, there's no Starbucks, so we are going to begin with what makes Starbucks famous.


We are done talking about the coffee beans and now it's time to talk about how, when, where Starbucks started .

STARBUCKS HISTORY



STARBUCKS COFFEES


After knowing where and when Starbucks originated and knowing who we should thankful for for giving us good coffees, let's now discover what Starbucks has to offer. Starbucks philosophy of creating blends relies on buying the world's finest coffees and combining them to achieve an intriguing interplay of flavour and aroma.

A cup of Starbucks coffee, A tall, or 12-ounce, costs $1.40 to $1.65.
Twelve-ounce lattes cost $2.40 to $3.10, depending on the market A tall mocha costs $2.70 to $3.40.

An Americano willusually have one more shot than a latte of the same size. It's an Espresso diluted with hot wateruntil it's roughly the strength of regular coffee. Espresso, steamed milk, and foam,not sweetened in any way unless you ask for syrup or sugar in it. This is like a latte, but has much more foam;normally half milk half foam. This is also not sweetened, and since iced drinks are made without foam, aniced cappuccino is the same as an iced latte. A lotsweeter than regular mochas, and also a bit less healthy. This is an Espresso and steamed milk mixed withwhite chocolate syrup and served with whipped cream.
A vanilla latte with abit less vanilla and extra foam, topped with gooey caramel sauce. Iced caramelmacchiatos, like hot ones, have the shots and caramel poured on top. Just espresso. A solo espresso is asingle shot, which is a bit less than an ounce. Espresso dropped into a cup of milkfoam, and only foam. Like a small, extremely dry cappuccino. These areordered not by cup size, but by the number of shots. Espresso in a big squirt of whippedcream. It can be ordered by the number of shots, rather than cup size.

A mocha Frappuccino with chocolatechip-like things blended in, served with whipped cream and chocolatedrizzled on top. One of the sweetest coffee-based Frappuccinos, but also one of themost popular. A coffee Frappuccino added with caramelsyrup, whipped cream and caramel sauce drizzled ontop.


A creme Frappuccino made withchocolate instead of vanilla. This is like a chocolate milkshake, or a mochaFrappuccino without coffee. STARBUCKS TERMS

Here are some Starbucks terms that you may use to order their coffees. These are useful especially if you'll visit the shop the first time.

When you mean SIZES:

Short 8 oz. The smallest size Starbucks offers, but you'll probably only get this size if you ask for it by name. Only hotdrinks can be served in the Short size. Tall 12 oz. This is what you'll get if you ask for a "small" drink. Grande 16 oz. This is the "medium" size. Venti 20 oz. hot, 24 oz. cold. For some reason the iced Venti cups hold four more ounces; for this reason,Venti espresso drinks have an extra shot of espresso in them. Its hot equivalent costs a few cents.



Single This is made with just one shot of espresso and the normal amount for all Tall-sized drinks except for Mocha Valencias and Americanos. Double This is made with two shots and the normal amount for all Grande- and hot Venti-sized drinks except for Mocha Valencias and Americanos. But this is also the normal amount for Tall-sized Mocha Valencias and Americanos. Triple This is made with three shots and the normal amount for Grande- and Venti-sized Mocha Valencias and Americanos. This is also the normal amount for most iced Venti-sized drinks. Quad This is made with four shots. If you are brave enough!


Syrup The syrup is sugar water with some kind of flavoring, and is mixed in the following amounts:
- 3 pumps in a Tall,
-4 in a Grande,
- 5 in a hot Venti,
- 6 in an Iced Venti.
- Caramel macchiatos have one pump less in each size. - Coffee-based Frappuccinos get one pump in a Tall or Grande, and two in a Venti.

Flavor syrup can be added to any drink, including regular coffee, frappuccinos, iced tea and Chai. The year-round syrups include sugar-free vanilla, vanilla, sugar-free hazelnut, hazelnut, Irish creme , mint, almond, Valencia (orange),raspberry, toffee nut, and caramel.


Nonfat All normal bar drinks can be made with nonfat milk. Blended drinks are made from pre-mixed concentrate, so the milk can't be changed, yet most are low in fat, especially if you don't include the whipped cream. Lowfat / "Percent" This is actually a 50-50 mixture of whole and nonfat. So, this may require the barista to steam two separate pitchers of milk if it's a hot drink, and may take a bit longer. Breve This is made with half and half instead of regular milk which makes it a bit sweeter, a bit thicker, a bit more expensive and fattening. Soy This depends on your location. However, it does cost extra. Organic Some stores also have organic milk available. It'll cost extra. This is seldom ordered.
Eggnog This is seasonal. It's only available during winter.
Lattes and caramel macchiatos are served with a certain amount of fluffy foamed milk on top. You can always ask for more or less, or no foam at all. Cappuccinos are made with much more foam than lattes; Starbucks standards dictate half milk, half foam. A dry cappuccino has more foam, a wet cappuccino has less. Whipped cream is made fresh in the store every day, and it's yummy. Mochas, white mochas, and vanilla cremes automatically come with whip; most other things don't. If you really want whip, or really don't, make sure to tell the barista when you order, because it's a lot easier to write it on the cup than it is to take it off or add it once the drink has been made.
Extra piping hot. If you order something extra hot, don't drink it too fast, because it could be up to or possibly over 170 degrees. By Starbucks rules, any drink that's going to be served to a child must be no hotter than 130 degrees. Keep that in mind when you go cheap and order the $1.00 kid's hot chocolate.
Baristas are not allowed to add anything you hand them to your drinks, but there are various sweeteners available on the condiment bar and you can ask to have two Equals, or three sugar packets, or whatever, added to your drink while it's being made.
There are two forms of caramel flavoring: caramel syrup , which is the sugar water stuff used to flavor caramel Frappuccinos, and caramel sauce , which is gooey, genuine caramel. This is drizzled on top of caramel macchiatos, caramel Frappuccinos, caramel mochas, and caramel apple ciders. Be sure to specify sauce rather than syrup. This may cost you extra.


When you offer good service, people will love not just the service you offer, rather the name making the good service...that's STARBUCKS!
