Defects in either insulin secretion or insulin action lead to diseases with high blood glucose levels collectively known as, diabetes


Insulin is a hormone that helps the cells absorb glucose to give them energy.


Acute signs of diabetes include excessive urine production, resulting compensatory thirst and increased fluid intake, blurred vision, unexplained weight loss, lethargy , and changes in energy metabolism. These signs are effects of hyperglycemia due to diminished production of insulin or resistance to its effect.



Developed diabetes prevalence rate of 6% to 10%. So far, diabetes, cardiovascular and cancer became the third after "health killer."

Epidemiology: Often seen in children and young adults but can appear in any age. 5 to 10% of diagnosed diabetes in the United States occurs equally among males and females
more common in whites than in non-white Rare in most African, American Indian, and Asian populations However, some northern European countries, including Finland and Sweden, have high rates of type 1 diabetes. The reasons for these differences are unknown.
Symptoms: Usually develop over a short period, although beta cell destruction can begin years earlier.
increased thirst and urination constant hunger weight loss blurred vision extreme fatigue.
If not diagnosed and treated with insulin, a person with type 1 diabetes can lapse into a life-threatening diabetic coma, also known as diabetic ketoacidosis.

If you have Type 1, your health care provider might recommend scheduled, nutritious meals, exercise, medication, and frequent blood sugar level tests.

. Symptoms: Develop gradually
fatigue thirst weight loss blurred vision frequent urination


Symptoms that are usually unique to type 2 diabetes: Obesity lower levels of blood glucose compared to type 1 slower onset of symptoms overall
3. Gestational Diabetes


Gestational occurs in pregnant women that have high blood glucose levels.

It is caused by insulin shortage or other pregnancy hormones.


Accounts for 3-8% of pregnant women in the United States more common in older people, especially in people who are overweight American Indians have one of the highest rates of diabetes in the world. occurs more often in African Americans, American Indians, some Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islander Americans, and Hispanics/Latinos.
On average, non-Hispanic African Americans are 1.8 times as likely to have diabetes as non-Hispanic whites of the same age. Mexican Americans are 1.7 times as likely to have diabetes as non-Hispanic whites of similar age.


Risk factors: heredity obesity
lack of exercise Management: Prescribed meal plans exercise daily testing medicine
Who's at risk?
Ages 45 or older Overweight or obese You have high blood pressure You are Latino, African American, Native American, Asian American or Pacific Islander. You've had a baby weighing more than 9 pounds or were diagnosed with gestational diabetes during your pregnancy. One of your immediate family has diabetes
How is diabetes diagnosed?

1. Fasting blood glucose test
most commonly used test for diagnosing diabetes in children and non-pregnant adults Higher reliabilty when done in the morning. However, a diagnosis of diabetes can be made based on any of the following test results, confirmed by retesting on a different day:

3. Recent onset of polyuria and polydipsia
The diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and many cases of type 2 Excessive urination and thirst usually worsen over days to weeks

4. Ordina ry health screening
5. Detection of hyperglycemia during other medical investigations
6. Secondary symptoms such as vision changes or unexplainable fatigue



How to control or manage Diabetes?
Exercise Weight control Sticking to your meal plan The amount of insulin must be balanced with food intake and daily activities

Oral medication for type 2 diabetes Manage blood pressure and cholesterol levels Adults with diabetes are at high risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD). In fact, at least 65 percent of those with diabetes die from heart disease or stroke. Aspirin therapy, if recommended
Smoking cessation
Making Lifestyle Changes that Help

Goal of diabetes management: Keep levels of blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol as close to the normal range as safely possible.


Some evidence suggest that persons with type 2 diabetes who have an active lifestyle, adhere to healthy diet and maintain weight can lead to "remission" of the effects of diabetes. Certainly these tips can help prevent people predisposed to type 2 diabetes and those at pre-diabetic stages from actually developing the disorder as it helps restore insulin sensitivity. However patients should talk to their doctors about this for real expectations before undertaking it (esp. to avoid hypoglycemia or other complications); few people actually seem to go into total 'remission,' but some may find they need less of their insulin medications since the body tends to have lower insulin requirements during and shortly following exercise. Regardless of whether it works that way or not for an individual, there are certainly other benefits to this healthy lifestyle for both diabetics and non-diabetics.




Refraining form alcohol as a preventive, but it is interesting to note that moderate alcohol intake may reduce the risk (though heavy consumption absolutely and clearly increases damage to bodily systems significantly) Walking is a great exercise. Do it every day, and you'll raise your metabolicrate, as well as level out your blood sugar. This means you will burn extracalories even while you are sitting in front of your computer or sleeping inyour bed! Look at the ways you save calories, and then spend them instead. Takethe stairs instead of the elevator. Park away from the door, instead of upclose. Use a pushmower instead of a riding mower. Pay attention to what you doand think of how you can burn more calories while doing it. Blood pressure control


Diet Eliminate as many processed carbohydrates as possible. Don't eat carbohydrates 2 hours before bedtime. Balance your fat/carbos/protein in a roughly 30/40/30 ratio (this is a guideline, not a hard and fast rule--it doesn't work for everyone). Eat at least 5 or 6 small meals a day. Always eat a high-protein breakfast. Improved control of blood cholesterol levels Reduce cardiovascular complications by 20%-50%

American Diabetes Association (ADA) Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International (JDRF) American Association of Diabetes Educators

The American Association of Diabetes Educators is a multi-disciplinary professional membershiporganization dedicated to improving diabetes care through education.

AADE advocates the team approach to diabetes care, and we believe that no care team iscomplete without a diabetes educator.

Patients with diabetes often feel overwhelmed and adrift when they leave the doctor's office andreturn to their everyday routines. Even though they may have been given instructions aboutmonitoring their health, taking proper medication and altering their lifestyles, patients stillhave trouble making the behavioral adjustments needed to manage their disease.



Primary care physicians, endocrinologists, pharmacists, podiatrists and otherhealthcare professionals, diabetes educators help patients set and achieve behaviorchange goals and create self-management plans tailored to meet individual lifestyle needs.

The highest quality care can be ensured by the diabetes care team and. in turn leads to, improvement in health outcomes.

Diabetes Educator



Certification Examination for Diabetes Educators designed and intended only for health care professionals who have defined roles as diabetes educators, not for those who may perform some diabetes related functions as part of or in the course of other usual and customary occupational duties Objectives:

An actual "Diabetes diet" does not exist. Your physician will recommend meeting with a nutritionist to plan a healthy diet that is suited to meet your health needs, including your weight. Carbohydrates must be monitored in order to maintain an even balance.

It is noted that a majority of adults who develop diabetes over the age of 40 do so because they are overweight or have high cholesterol and/or fat levels in their blood. Diet and exercise can play an important role in staying healthy.
