A marriage license is a permit that allowing you to legally marry someone, although obtaining one does not mean that you ARE already married. The rules and requirements for getting a marriage license depend upon on the state and country you live in.
Marriage Licenses
Some things you will want to know:

When: You'll likely need to apply in a week or two before your wedding. You should find out if how long is the waiting period, and for how long the license is valid.
Documents: What are the documents needed to present upon application for a marriage license. Typically, the requirements to submit are birth certificates, proof of citizenship and/or residence, and a driver's license or other photo id. If you have been divorced or widowed , you should bring a copy of the death certificate or divorce decree. Fees: How much to pay and how to pay it. Some can be paid by money order or cashier's check, but some states require it cash. Blood test: There are states that still asking for a blood test. Residency requirements: If you are getting married in a state other than where you live, you'll also want to find out about residency requirements that is, how long you must be in the county before you can be qualified to apply. THE PROCEDURE : Here are the step-by step procedure on how to apply for a marriage license ...
the bride and groom should bring their identification, required paperwork, fees, and sometimes blood test results to the county clerk.

The marriage license can either be mailed or picked up by the couple.

The waiting period depends on the state where you are applying the license.

You should be married by someone who is legally allowed to do so in your state.

The officer who'll conduct the wedding ceremony, usually two witnesses, and sometimes the bride and groom sign the marriage license.

After the signing, the marriage license is returned to the county clerk's office.

After about a week, the copies of the certified marriage certificate can be obtained from the clerk's office.



Hawaii Marriage License Requirements Where to apply; Department of Health marriage licensing office Fees: $60 cash Documents needed: If you are 19 or above, a current driver's license. If you are 18 or younger, a certified birth certificate. If you are 16 or 17, you'll need the written consent of your parent or guardian. Marriage License validity: 30 days Waiting period or residency necessary: None
New York Marriage License Requirements Where to apply: A town or city clerk Fees: Approximately $35-$50 Documents: Identification showing your and age, birthdate or a birth certificate or naturalization record. Marriage License validity: 60 days Waiting period or residency necessary: 24 hours waiting period; Non-residents cannot obtain a marriage license if the said marriage would be void in their state.
Florida Marriage License Requirements Where to apply: The local County Clerk of Courts Fees: $93.50 Documents needed: driver's license and a document showing Social Security number Marriage License validity: 60 days Waiting period or residency necessary: Three-day waiting period

California Marriage License Requirements Where to apply: The County Clerk's Office Fees: it varies by county Documents needed: Valid identification with picture such as a driver's license. Other counties also require for a birth certificate. Marriage License validity: 90 days Waiting period or residency necessary: none
Las Vegas Marriage License Requirements Where to apply :The County Clerk's Office Fees; $55 cash Documents needed : Identification with your proof of age, Social Security Number Marriage License validity: Indefinite Waiting period or residency necessary: None



Ice breaker games are played at the very beginning of the shower, after all the guests arrive. Ice breakers are designed to get the revelry flowing and .