There are 58 species of reptile and amphibians present Plant species total an impressive 1,500 Fish species come in 26 varieties
With 5 distinct biotic life zones, this park has as many as you would find traveling from Canada to Mexico The bald eagle, peregrine falcon and humpback chub make up the 3 endangered wildlife species There are two endangered plant species, namely, Brady pincushion cactus and sentry milk vetch
Number of identified archaeological sites within the park = 2,700 One Indian reservations remains in the park: 1 (Havasupai) 120 buildings are listed as National Landmarks 136 structures are also on the National Register of Historic Places:
Grand Canyon is located at Latitude 36°, Longitude -112° State: Arizona County: Coconino - Grand Canyon lies within Coconino County. This is the official site for the county. Time Zone: Mountain - does not favor Daylight Savings Time, so much of the year the time is the same as in California. The Grand Canyon was established as a forest preserve in 1892 It then became a national monument in 1908 National park status followed in 1919 National park enlarged in 1975 Total acreage: 1,215,375 Length in air miles: 190 Length in river miles: 277 Minimum width: 600 feet at Marble Canyon Maximum width: 18 miles Average width: 10 miles 76 feet is the minimum width of Colorado River 300 feet is the average width of Colorado River 85 feet is the maximum depth of river 40 feet is the average depth of river There are 160 rapids
River average gradient: 8 feet per mile Total miles of trails in the park: 400 Total number of those trail miles that are maintained: 30.7 355 miles of roads
287 is the number of bird species in the park 88 mammal species occur

ARIZONA GAME AND FISH HUNTING - A TYPICAL HUNT SEASON UNDER REVIEW

If you are a hunter, spring is the time for action - the deadline to apply for spring hunts is around the corner. October 14 is the precise date, so don't procrastinate is the "loud and clear" message right now. This time, the hunt application process is for bearded turkey, javelina, bear and buffalo. Don't forget, there is always something new for the coming season, for example, we have over-the-counter non-permit turkey tags for the youth. Arizona Game and Fish Hunting officials pointed out that it is once again a manual application process for the spring hunts. In other words, there is no online application process available. To make things interesting, Biologists pointed out that the copious spring rains coupled with the expected above average rainfall this summer should equate to a good year for javelina. The excellent mast crop in the high country this year bodes well for turkey populations. Spring hunt regulations should be available at all license dealers statewide, or you can stop by any of the seven Arizona Game and Fish Department offices in the state to get your copy. Don't miss out!
National Hunting and Fishing Day Events Arizona outdoor enthusiasts have the opportunity to participate in several events this weekend in celebration of National Hunting and Fishing Day on Sept. 27. Then. the Arizona Game and Fish Department is partnering with the Tucson Sportsman Warehouse store, 3945 W. Costco Drive, on the following events: Thursday, Sept. 25, 7-8 p.m. Seminar on hiking and wildlife.
Friday, Sept. 26, 7-8 p.m. is Kids-Out-Night, when they can catch fish from the huge catch-and-release tank, try their skill on the laser shot simulator, and more.
Saturday, Sept. 27, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Mini-Expo. Bring the family for free food, catch-and-release fishing from the big tank, and the opportunity to chat with various sportsmen/conservation groups. Down Phoenix way, the department will staff several booths, including a live wildlife display from the Adobe Mountain Wildlife Center, as well as information from the Operation Game Thief program. Catch all this at the Phoenix Sportsman Warehouse store from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Saturday, Sept. 27. The store is located at 19205 N. 27th Ave. in Phoenix. Looking to refine your fishing skills? Learning to fly fish with a fly rod or a spinning rod is great fun for young and old alike. CAMP TROUT is the place to learn all this - it's a unique trout fishing program being conducted by the Arizona Game and Fish Department in conjunction with the White Mountains Fly Fishing Club at Becker Lake in the White Mountains. On Saturday, Oct. 4, the 3hour program will feature one-on-one instruction on the use of lures and artificial flies to improve angling success. Entrants will be able to choose from and rotate between a number of learning activities, each led by an experienced instructor says a spokesman in the department. There will be two sessions, one in the morning and one in the afternoon, with a 20-person limit per session. So don't delay in signing up. Full training will be offered in fly-fishing techniques, proper use of trout lures and presentation, use of casting bubbles with flies and trolling techniques. There will also be demonstrations on fly tying and methods of cooking and smoking fish. Resource materials and handouts will be provided, as well. All attendees are encouraged to bring their own equipment, but we'll have plenty of specialized gear for folks to try out, adds the spokesman. The program is about hands-on learning, asking questions, and being with others who are also interested in fishing in Arizona. With the water levels up at most mountain trout waters, this is an excellent time to refine your trout fishing skills. Don't miss out! Learn more about protecting wildlife in the Arizona great outdoors hands-on workshop. It will teach the core basics of camping, fishing and hunting too. If you are you new to Arizona or would you like to learn more about how to participate in the exciting outdoor recreational opportunities that the state has to offer, this could be for you. The Arizona Game and Fish Department is hosting a weekend camp at Cataract Lake in the Coconino County Campground near Williams from Oct. 4-5. The workshop is aimed at residents new to Arizona, and families and individuals who want to learn hands-on the basics of camping, fishing, hunting, how to prepare fish and game, and other outdoor activities. The workshop will begin at 9 a.m. on Saturday with registration, camp information and welcome. Classes will be offered throughout the day on a variety of topics focused on how to enjoy Arizona great outdoors. The day will conclude with instruction on how to prepare and enjoy a Dutch oven dinner over a campfire. Sunday will include an activity and wrap-up. We really want to reach those residents who have yet to experience the great Arizona outdoors. It's an ideal opportunity for new residents, families or single parents who want to get outdoors, but don't know how to get started, says Arizona Game and Fish Department Public Information Officer, Shelly Shepherd. It takes the form of a non-intimidating environmental cession to learn the basics. We hope that participants will feel comfortable going out on their own after the workshop to enjoy outdoor recreational opportunities. Hosting the workshop is the Coconino County Parks and Recreation Department. Cataract Lake and the Coconino County Campground are located on the west side of Williams, off Interstate 40 at exit #161. From the exit, go north under the railroad tunnel and continue on for another mile. The campground is on the right-hand side of the road, on the west side of the lake. There is plenty of room for trailers, campers or tents. Participants should pack appropriate clothing, and be prepared for one night of camping. Bring along food, water, and snacks for the weekend. Participants with their own fishing equipment or binoculars are encouraged to bring them.

If you require more information, or want to register for the workshop, contact the Game and Fish office in Flagstaff at (928) 774-5045. Sept. 30 is t he deadline for registration, and the workshop will be limited to 50 people. A nominal fee of no more than $10 will be required on arrival.
Game and Fish employee receives award from national boating safety organization The National Association of State Boating Law Administrators (NASBLA) has honored Madelynn Fenske, watercraft customer service supervisor for the Arizona Game and Fish Department, with its esteemed President Award for her contributions to the association and to boating safety over the past year. She received the award at the association 49th annual meeting in Clearwater Beach, Fla., Sept. 6-10. NASBLA President John Fetterman recognized Fenske for the extensive time and effort she devoted to the association Vessel Identification, Registration and Titling Committee. She worked on the revision of the Standard Numbering System Regulations and also led the committee through several revisions of the Model Act for Vessel Titling. She was instrumental in the development of the National Vessel Numbering and Titling Manual as well as the development and execution of the Vessel Numbering and Titling Program Measures of Effectiveness project. She continues to monitor the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws Uniform Certificate of Title Act for Vessels. Fenske joined the Arizona Game and Fish Department in 1987 as the revenue control technician in the watercraft section. In 1993, she became the customer service supervisor. She is responsible for the statewide watercraft registration program, which has considerable scope, complexity, and monetary and public impact. Fenske provides technical guidance and direction to department personnel throughout the state and to the public in the design, development, implementation and evaluation of the program. NASBLA is a national nonprofit organization that works to develop public policy for recreational boating safety. It represents the recreational boating authorities of all 50 states, as well as the U.S. territories. It offers a variety of resources, including training, model acts, education standards and publications.
Coming to a sporting store near you: non-lead ammunition displays The next time you shop at Sportsman Warehouse, Cabela or Bass Pro stores in Arizona, look for the Arizona Game and Fish Department new non-lead ammunition displays. The new displays, supported by partners like the Arizona Deer Association, Arizona Elk Society, Arizona Antelope Foundation, Arizona Desert Bighorn Sheep Society, Arizona Chapter of the National Wild Turkey Federation and the sporting retailers, feature information on the performance benefits of non-lead ammunition, as well as the benefits to wildlife. The department expects the displays to help hunters more quickly locate the non-lead ammunition they're looking for while also increasing awareness of lead toxicity in wildlife, especially the endangered California condor. Lead toxicity continues to be the greatest obstacle to achieving a self-sustaining population of condors in the state. Studies show that lead shot and bullet fragments found in game carcasses and gut piles are the main source of lead in condors.


The department and its partners encourage hunters to continue their proud tradition of wildlife conservation by using non-lead ammunition in condor range (Game Management Units 9, 10, 12A/B, and 13A/B). The department started offering free non-lead ammunition in 2005 to hunters drawn for hunts in the condor core range, which includes Game Management Units 12 A/B and 13A. Surveys show that more than 80 percent of hunters took measures last year to reduce the amount of lead available to condors versus 60 percent in 2006. Want to learn how to hunt tree squirrels? The Arizona Game and Fish Department will conduct a free small game hunting camp on Oct. 10 and 11 in the White Mountains to provide Arizona youth and others with the basic skills they need to successfully pursue tree squirrels. The program will also provide an overview of hunting opportunities for other small game species in our state. Youth need to be at least 8 years old to participate. "This intensive camp is designed to provide youth and those new to hunting with an opportunity to enhance their hunting knowledge and skills here in Arizona, while also teaching them the values of stewardship and wildlife conservation," says Wildlife Manager Supervisor Mike Godwin. "The workshop is all about hands-on learning, asking questions, and being with others who are also interested in hunting in our state." The camp will be held at the Los Burros Campground, located on Forest Road 224 that runs between Vernon and McNary. The program will cover hunting opportunities, firearm safety and game care. Other activities include archery instruction and 3-D shooting, survival basics, first aid and more. Instructional sessions begin at 6 p.m. on Friday, and participants will hunt in the field with mentors Saturday. The workshop, sponsored by the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, includes meals, instruction and field time with hunting mentors. The program is aimed at developing responsible and successful hunters who recognize the importance of wildlife and habitat conservation. The White Mountain Rod and Gun Club will also be assisting with the event.