Easy-going folks like me (perhaps you too) start daydreaming about springtime trips exploring sunny railroads the moment the cold weather hits our bones. B eautiful scenery, nice warm sunshine, and a great railroad experience will certainly stir the soul, we think. So let's see now, what sounds a good place to start rooting? Perhaps a mountain railroad where they've still got those SD45Ts and a few wide-cab units- plus a few pushers chasing them up the gradients? Now that would be something to warm the cockles of a railroad buff's heart and warmth is what I need.
So what specific comes to mind? How about the Southern Pacific? The Cascades would also fit the bill, but which of us has money to fund a visit to the National Convention Cup in Madison which we'd surely have to do.
Let's look a little bit closer home. How about the Rio Grande main railway line over Tennessee Pass. It's sure got all the ingredients and a history to die for you - although personally I'd prefer it stays open forever.
That's why I decided to visit my old friend the Kansas City Southern - at least as soon as the frost had lifted and I could appreciate it with the Kansas sun warming my back again. In fact, the more I thought about it the more I realized that the KCS was a great choice for several more reasons too. It was nearby my home, with ready access and lots of variety to enjoy. If you appreciate the few Class One railroads left that we can still wander over without being chased away, then you should really visit this one while while the opportunity remains. Would you believe he started building the Kansas City Southern Railway with money he made selling a coupon annuity life-insurance policy (that paid the policy holder an income after a certain age) that he invented. What an amazing person!
KCS has been in the media lately, although not all the news has been good what with the line being in suspended animation, so to speak. However there have been exciting developments in the locomotive department thanks to recent new acquisitions that seem to suggest a brighter future for the KCS.
Most exciting (to me at least) are SD45T-2's locomotives upgraded by engineering firm Morrision Knudson to later "-3" standards. You can spot them easily from their gray paint color-scheme that replaced the previously popular white appearance. The units also feature the recently reintroduced classic "Kansas City Southern Lines" logo which is a dead giveaway. I spotted these revamped units early last year at the Pittsburgh Kansas workshops while still in ESPEE undercoating (named after chemical manufacturer Espee PharmaChem ) and figured something must be happening. This was one of the few occasions when my railway spotting theories turned out right.
Next to arrive were some unusual GP40-2LW units. These are hand-me-downs from Canadian National, and boast wide-nose comfort cabs that are popular with drivers on bigger units most everywhere in the States. Personally I think the KCS trademark yellow safety strip looks particularly good on these.
Fans of the F-unit fans haven't been overlooked. During 1995 they imported four VIA RAIL FP9A's that still boasted Southern Belle's black, red and yellow strip. The units were named for cities with Kansas City Southern workshop facilities, namely Meridan, Pittsburgh, Shreveport and Vicksburg.

The Kansas City Southern purchased the old Illinois Central subsidiary "Mid South" to supplement its Kansas City to New Orleans mainline. At that time its lines radiated out from Shreveport, Louisiana to Port Arthur and Dallas, Texas. The "Mid South" added Birmingham, Alabama and Mississippi as destinations, creating a system almost three thousand miles long.

Mid South Rail Corporation was established on March 31, 1986 to purchase 373 miles of Illinois Central Gulf Railroad , with commissioning the following day. The MSRC main operation was the previously named Illinois Central Gulf line between Meridian, Mississippi, and Shreveport, Louisiana (this having been originally constructed in 1833 by the Clinton and Vicksburg Railroad) .


By September 8, 1987, MSRC had acquired the North Louisiana and Gulf Railroad and its subsidiary, Central Louisiana and Gulf Railroad too (these latter lines were incorporated as a subsidiary Mid Louisiana Rail Corporation ). On April 14, 1988, Mid South merged again, this time with the Gulf and Mississippi Railroad - itself an Illinois Central Gulf Railroad spinoff. And so the game of monopoly for millionaires continued.
KCS only began finally operating its own rolling stock over Mid South's old lines on January 11, 1994. The first they used ran east from Shreveport across Louisiana, and then right through the state of Mississippi. As it did, it passed through Vicksburg, Jackson, Meridian, and Artesia, Mississippi. Then it crossed the Alabama state line into Tuscaloosa, and finally - via its Norfolk Southern Railway tracking rights - arrived in Birmingham.


The Midsouth had two other branches, namely one to Counce, Tennessee , and another (a disconnected track) from Gulfport to Hattiesburg, Mississippi. This made the total raileage that KCS acquired 1212 miles . Unfortunately the recent KCS news hasn't turned out good at all despite those loco acquisitions. CEO Mike Haverty (ex Sante Fe)has failed in every attempt to grow his railroad into a major player in the face of competition the ever expanding "major leagues". He began by opposing the UP/SP and BN/SF mergers in the vain hope of winning trackage rights concessions. Next, he bid on the SOO Line's ex-Milwaukee Road trackage from Chicago to Kansas City, in hopes working with the Wisconsin Central.
Who knows what will become of the Kansas City Southern someday in the future? Will it remain independent, close down or be gobbled up? I guess only time will tell. In the mean time, I'm going to grab my camera and take some pix while things are relatively quiet. So all I had to do was to tune the scanner in to destination 160.350 and drive away to Southeastern Kansas and US Route 69. My first stop was at Pittsburgh, where I visited an an open train order office at the north end of the yard. The boys there provided invaluable information about lineups - and the trains that stop just short of the nearby crossing to exchange crews (the shops themselves are at the south end of the yard and easily visible from the road).


A daily shuttle with an MP15AC locomotive and cars runs f rom the South Eastern Kansas short line to their small yard west of the KCS interchange. Before I got going with my camera I stocked up with a great American breakfast at Harry's Diner right downtown. Then I headed southeast towards Joplin, Missouri on Highway 17, although as always, I stopped to take a picture at the Spring Creek Bridge.
The abandoned depot in Joplin can be a little spooky, although it's still a great location to video passing trains. However don't delay if you are chasing a particular train to see who's faster through the forests, or you will fall too far behind to get to Neosho on Route 71 in time. It's not difficult to become disorientated at Neosho what with the BN mainline nearby. My advice is stick with your train, and listen to the chat on the radio. There's a hugely photogenic depot at Anderson, Missouri, and you need to book a slot to take a photo there. After Anderson, I usually take Highway 59 southwards to some unusual spots like the caboose at Gravette, Arkansas, and the F-Unit in Decatur. Just in case your wife is mad about your being gone too much chasing trains (and whose isn't) there are some hand-painted signs in the Arkansas Ozarks offering divorces for just $40!
In fact the countryside is so beautiful and the culture is so different that I've been tempted on occasion to stray from the beaten path into a forest with a lovely lady (remind me to tear this page out the book if I'm ever crazy enough to want to publish it).

Although it is difficult to make good time along the winding roads through western Arkansas near Siloam Springs, and in eastern Oklahoma generally, there are some easy sections at Baron, Stillwell and Sallisaw where it's possible to floor the pedal and catch up with an elusive train. Some folk I know load their pickups on coal trains at Heavener and take the climb over Oklahoma's Rich Mountain gradients instead. Their journeys end is usually at Gans, Oklahoma, because after that the roads and railroad separate for a great distance.
It's not unusual to encounter eight to ten road freight trains - along with coal and local trains around Pittsburgh itself - on the average day. This makes it easy to have great day out on one of America's finest midsize class offerings available! The route from Gans heads east to get to Little Rock. After that, I'll head for Tennessee to end my journey, and head back home.
He died of apoplexy on September 26, 1928 while struggling to make ends meet in New York. His wife Jennie (they married in their early twenties) committed suicide by jumping out the window of their apartment thirteen days later. It's said the Stilwells left an estate of only $1,000. I reckon they bequeathed a whole lot more to America though. I heard they were cremated but their remains have never been located.