General View of Mitchell College

"A Perfect Academic Setting"

While she may have gotten her start there, it was her success in Pretty Woman that really put her on the map.

Julia Roberts


- named after the seventh lighthouse ever built in North America that stood 18.25 meters tall but collapsed in 1926 after a storm destroyed it - (named for Carolyn and Jerry Holleran who have a passion for community service and a personal record of meaningful community engagement).
Mitchell College values: Diversity, Equity, and Shared Governance Academic Excellence Education of the Entire Person Environmental Stewardship Adherence to Common Ethical and Moral Standards Community Service and Global Citizenship

In this regard, the Board of Trustees adopted the following Guidelines in October 2004.
Diversity, Equity, and Shared Governance

Connecticut College was founded i n the early 20th Century on the belief that all qualified students - women as well as men - deserved the chance of a superior education. Accordingly, we strive to become a community in which all members respect each others' differences, feel comfortable, and desire to identify common ground. Through offering a variety of academic and social experiences , Mitchell promotes understanding, as it commits itself to building greater equity, access and opportunity. Governance of the College is a participatory process in which students, faculty members, trustees, staff, and alumni all participate.
Academic Excellence

We challenge students to reach their full intellectual potential through innovation and engaging faculty members, rigorous academic standards, and a diverse classroom curriculum. In return we expect students - through internships, research and travel - to learn outside their classrooms too. Mitchell College encourages these opportunities in the belief that genuine academic excellence relies on a diversity of life experiences. We expect (and strongly support) research, and faculty scholarship - and creative work that advances human knowledge and expression and informs excellent teaching too.
Education of the Entire Person

Nurturing the intellectual, emotional, spiritual, creative, and physical development of our student body is a core value. Mitchell encourages and supports all our student members to embrace the widest possible range of activities. These include academic pursuits, as well as physical education, athletics, artistic expression, and community services. We promote appreciation of the natural and aesthetic connectedness of the soul, body, mind, and spirit. We prepare students to be creative problem-solvers, responsible citizens, and thoughtful leaders of the emerging global society. Environmental Stewardship


Connecticut College is proud of its pioneering tradition of ecological responsibility and awareness. Moreover, it intends to remain the leader in safeguarding the local environment in which it finds itself. Our treed campus is a showpiece of these values in itself. P rograms and procedures at the College are designed to preserve and protect our world for succeeding generations and globally. We hope to prepare future citizens to be sensitive to the need for responsible environmental stewardship, as a debt they owe the generations that will follow on from them.
Adherence to Common Ethical and Moral Standards

We have a cast-iron commitment to this Honor Code. Students are expected to monitor their own faithfulness to the principles of moral integrity and honesty, and to display personal courage to defend these values in their academic and social interactions. These principles of justice - impartiality and fairness - are the foundations of the equity we hold paramount.

Education of the Entire Person

The College places the intellectual, emotional, spiritual, creative, and physical development our students before anything else. Accordingly, they are encouraged to engage in the widest possible range of academic pursuits, athletic endeavors and physical education - not to mention community service and artistic expression too (whatever that may be). , We place emphasis appreciation on the aesthetic connectedness of the body, mind and soul. It is our desire to prepare students to be responsible citizens, creative problem-solvers, and thoughtful leaders in a global society. Adherence to Common Ethical and Moral Standards

Students are required to monitor their own faithfulness to the principles of moral integrity and honesty and and to display courage in academic and social interactions. The principles of justice, impartiality, and fairness - the foundations for equity - are paramount.
Community Service and Global Citizenship Connecticut College fosters civic responsibility and enhances academic excellence through a long tradition of community involvement and through courses that provide opportunities for service. The College promotes an understanding of local, regional, national, and international peoples, groups, cultures, and issues, and encourages students to take a life-long interest in them.

Environmental Stewardship
Mitchell College has a pioneering tradition of ecological awareness and responsibility, and shall remain a leader in safeguarding the environment. Our arboretum campus is an ecological showpiece, and the College's procedures and programs aim to preserve and protect the environment, both locally and globally that God has given us. Accordingly, we charge all students to be sensitive to the need for responsible environmental stewardship. We Wish You Well with Your Studies Here. God Bless You in All You Do.
