Leak Detection and Repairs of Toilets

When it comes to household water wastage, toilets are definitely the main culprits. Often, we aren't even aware that our toilets are leaking, and yet it is an easy problem to detect and fix. Often, it's down to worn washers or seals, and these are relatively cheap to replace. Just a small toilet leak can result in water bills of $50 or more a year, and the planet is not replenishing this scarce resource nearly quickly enough.

A proper functioning toilet sees the water move from the tank to the bowl by way of pressing a button or pulling a lever. This releases a head of water to flush the bowl and remove the waste. In a leaking toilet, the water flows from tank to bowl constantly. You may not even here a "dripping" sound, but you will notice a higher water bill each month.

Toilet leak testing involves mixing a dye with the water in the tank. Around 20 minutes after dyeing the water, check the water in the toilet bowl. If it is still clear, then no water has leaked from the tank. If you should find even a hint of the dye, your toilet has a leak. With a serious leak, the toilet will actually flush constantly on its own accord, and this can be very confusing when it comes to detecting a leak. There are several possible causes of leaks in your toilet, but by far the most common is the valve that controls the release of water from the tank to the bowl. In most toilets, this is a soft rubber flap. Even the water quality can erode these valves and chemicals added to the tank don't help either. These flaps may last from between 2 to 7 years. Replacing a toilet flapper valve is not expensive - they cost a maximum $10 - and it isn't that difficult a job for the average handy person. Calling in a plumber can make this an expensive repair though. Plumbers charge for their travel time as well as for the time on the job. Don't be confused by the bewildering choice of flapper valves, it's really just a marketing gimmick. After isolating the water supply line to your toilet tank, simply remove the old valve and keep as a sample. Then, when you get to the hardware or home improvement store, finding a replacement should be quick and easy. Your store attendant should be clued up and able to advise further.

If you use an in-tank toilet cleaning product that contains chlorine or other strong chemical, you should consider spending a little extra for a flapper valve made of composite rubbers that are more resistant to the caustic effect of chemicals.
Installing a Retrofit Device In-Tank A startling statistic this one: In the U.S., approximately 40 percent of all domestic water used is flushed down the toilet. But that's not all, one person using an older 5.5 gallon flush toilet will use around 13,000 gallons of clean, fresh water a year just to dispose of 165 gallons of body waste. It's no surprise then that, a bewildering array of retrofit devices has been developed to improve the water consumption in our older toilets. Getting an old "loo" to use less water can make a significant difference to both consumption and water bills. Put another way, since all water from the toilet goes directly into a water-born sewer or septic tank, saving water used by a toilet reduces both demand and wastewater flows. Hydraulic overload is the single most common cause of on-site wastewater treatment failure. Surface ponding and backup can often be eliminated simply by retrofitting with efficient toilet and showerhead mechanisms.

Commonly, retrofitting older toilets simply means installing a displacement device. And these displacement devices are used primarily on non-conserving toilets in order to reduce the volume of water used each time the toilet is flushed. Typical displacement devices may include bricks, plastic bottles, or even plastic bags. Of course, lighter items must be weight-loaded to ensure stability. If a brick is used, make sure to wrap it in a plastic wrap, or place it into a small garbage bag before placing it into the tank. Some bricks may deteriorate slightly if constantly in water and then cause damage to the flushing mechanisms through the breakdown of the composite material constituting a brick. Many types of displacement devices are simply placed into the tank, in a manner that they do not interfere with the function of the flushing mechanisms. They exercise control through the water volume, and there's a great saving be made each time the toilet is flushed under these conditions. These devices can reduce the amount of fresh water used by about 4.2 gallons per toilet, per day. Moreover, the use of these devices can reduce water consumption by around 13%, from the consumption which would have been used if the volume displacement devices were not in place. Simply by reducing the amount of water available for each flush, a toilet displacement dam is a device which differs from the volume displacement device. The 'dam' consists of two sheets of plastic sheet wedged into the tank on either side of the flush mechanism. What happens is that the plastic holds back a small amount of water with each flush, thereby effecting a water saving. The technical specifications, claim that tank dams save around 6 gallons of water per toilet per day. This translates to a direct saving of around 18% on water consumption. Another plus with tank dams is less movement in the cistern and therefor no interference with the flush mechanism. The early-close flapper is yet another retrofit to a toilet flushing system. Here, the device replaces the standard flapper valve and is designed to shut sooner, before all the water in the toilet tank can flow into the toilet bowl. Early-close flappers do offer an adjustment for the toilet owner to decide on the balance between saving water and having the toilet bowl properly cleansed.
Using a ULF Toilet

In the U.S., approximately 40 percent of all domestic water consumed is flushed down the toilet. One person using an older 5.5 gallon flush toilet will use 13,000 gallons of fresh water per year to dispose of 165 gallons of body waste. For this reason, 1.6-gallon ultra-low flush (ULF) toilets are now required on new construction nationwide. Because the useful life of a toilet is measured in decades, older 3.5 gallon and 5.5 gallon models still constitute the majority of toilets in use. Replacing an older toilet with a 1.6 gallon model can significantly reduce water demand and stress on sewer systems. This is why many water suppliers offer inducements to replace older toilets. Toilet manufacturers now make a large variety of ULF toilets that use 0.7 to 1.6 gallons per flush. These toilets rely on various mechanisms to accomplish their job using much less water. Since all water from the toilet goes directly into the sewer or septic tank, water saving toilets reduce both consumption and wastewater flows. Hydraulic overload is the single most common cause of on-site wastewater treatment failure. Surface ponding and backup can often be eliminated by retrofitting with efficient toilets and showerheads. Some versions of ULF toilets use early-close flapper valves to shut off flow between the toilet tank and bowl before the tank is fully drained. These toilets closely resemble older models in appearance and design, and often cost less than other options. One serious drawback, however, is that when the flapper valve inevitably wears out and begins to leak, the homeowner may not easily find the correct early-close replacement valve. Often, homeowners aren't even aware that their toilets contain special flapper valves, and will inadvertently replace them with standard flapper valves. This causes a significant increase in water usage. Still other ULF toilets rely on some sort of proprietary flush mechanism. Many of these toilets work just fine when new, but all have rubber or plastic parts that eventually wear out and need replacing. Often, the homeowner will be unable to find the necessary parts! Many early ULF toilets were hastily designed and did not always work satisfactorily. Today, nearly all new ULF toilets are equal or superior to most conventional toilets in their ability to clean the bowl and move solids through sewers. The key is for consumers to determine what parts will require replacing over time, and to buy spares in good time.

If you want a metric to show that we are on our way to civilization, try the proliferation of pay toilets in our public spaces. Soon, the days of dreading to walk into a restroom for fear of a mildew-mold-bacteria hybrid monster devouring you from the shoes up will be nothing but a nightmare to scare kids into behaving. No more urine puddles, no stray drops on the toilet seat. No more bits of dinners past floating in the bowl. In a public restroom outside Vinzons Hall in the University of the Philippines, a toilet bowl has become filled to the brim that it looks like a ceramic flower pot without the flowers or any aesthetic value whatsoever. In an office restroom on Katipunan, someone once left soiled panties and a napkin in a puddle on the floor. It was like a serial killer leaving a calling card, but not as precise or thought out. There is no upper limit, it seems, to the depravity that men can aspire to, and, as is the case with many things, there is a need for someone to keep things in check. Or, at least, clean up afterwards. If you are lucky, someone to dispense lotion and cheap cologne too! Of course, for the Filipino with no pocket change and a bladder threatening to fail, pay toilets are the greatest form of capitalist oppression. Just another way for The Man to tell us where, when, and how to do our business. And this is valid, too. Two sides of the same 5-Peso coin, one might say.

Finishing on a comical note - just like we started, I once worked for a large corporate where ladies and gents toilets were practically located on each floor of the multrise building. However, I was intrigued when I visited the entirely female complement of data capture clerks on a floor they had to themselves. When I asked what they did with the urinals in the men's toilet, I was tickled by their response -"why, it's the perfect place to grow and water pot plants". Also, there was no contention here with "who left the toilet seat up?" either!
END