If a line segment intersects twostraight lines forming two interior angles on the same side thatsum to less than two right angles, then the two lines, if extendedindefinitely, meet on that side on which the angles sum to lessthan two right angles.



If the order the postulateswere listed in the Elements is significant, it indicates thatEuclid included this postulate only when he realised he could notprove it or proceed without it.

Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)(965-1039), an Iraqi mathematician, made the first attempt atproving the parallel postulate using a proof by contradiction,where he introduced the concept of motion and transformation intogeometry. He formulated the Lambert quadrilateral, which BorisAbramovich Rozenfeld names the "Ibn al-Haytham Lambertquadrilateral", and his attempted proof also shows similarities toPlayfair's axiom.

Omar Khayy m (1050-1123) madethe first attempt at formulating a non-Euclidean postulate as analternative to the parallel postulate. The Khayyam-Saccheriquadrilateral was also first considered by Omar Khayyam in the late11th century in Book I of Explanations of the Difficulties inthe Postulates of Euclid . Unlike many commentators on Euclidbefore and after him (including Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri),Khayyam was not trying to prove the parallel postulate as such butto derive it from an equivalent postulate: "Two convergent straightlines intersect and it is impossible for two convergent straightlines to diverge in the direction in which they converge." Herecognized that three possibilities arose from omitting Euclid'sFifth; if two perpendiculars to one line cross another line,judicious choice of the last can make the internal angles where itmeets the two perpendiculars equal (it is then parallel to thefirst line). If those equal internal angles are right angles, weget Euclid's Fifth; otherwise, they must be either acute or obtuse.He persuaded himself that the acute and obtuse cases lead tocontradiction, but had made a tacit assumption equivalent to thefifth to get there.

Nasir al-Din al-Tusi(1201-1274), in his Al-risala al-shafiya'an al-shakk fi'l-khututal-mutawaziya ( Discussion Which Removes Doubt about ParallelLines ) (1250), wrote detailed critiques of the parallelpostulate and on Khayy m's attempted proof a century earlier. Nasiral-Din attempted to derive a proof by contradiction of the parallelpostulate. He was also one of the first to consider the cases ofelliptical geometry and hyperbolic geometry, though he ruled outboth of them. Nasir al-Din's son, Sadr al-Din (sometimesknown as "Pseudo-Tusi"), wrote a book on the subject in 1298, basedon Nasir al-Din's later thoughts, which presented one of theearliest arguments for a non-Euclidean hypothesis equivalent to theparallel postulate. "He essentially revised both the Euclideansystem of axioms and postulates and the proofs of many propositionsfrom the Elements ." His work was published in Rome in 1594and was studied by European geometers. This work marked thestarting point for Saccheri's work on the subject.

Giordano Vitale (1633-1711),in his book Euclide restituo (1680, 1686), used theKhayyam-Saccheri quadrilateral to prove that if three points areequidistant on the base AB and the summit CD, then AB and CD areeverywhere equidistant. Girolamo Saccheri (1667-1733) pursued thesame line of reasoning more thoroughly, correctly obtainingabsurdity from the obtuse case (proceeding, like Euclid, from theimplicit assumption that lines can be extended indefinitely andhave infinite length), but failing to debunk the acute case(although he managed to wrongly persuade himself that hehad). Modern mathematics (starting in the 19th century) finallyaddressed this issue when they realized that geometry could beperformed in "spaces" that satisfied Euclid's first four postulatesbut violated the fifth. In 1829, Nikolai IvanovichLobachevsky published an account of acute geometry in an obscureRussian journal (later re-published in 1840 in German). In 1831, Jnos Bolyai included, in a book by his father, an appendixdescribing acute geometry, which, doubtlessly, he had developedindependently of Lobachevsky. Carl Friedrich Gauss had actuallystudied the problem before that, but he did not publish any of hisresults. However, upon hearing of Boylai's results in a letter fromBolyai's father, Farkas Bolyai, he stated:

"If I commenced by sayingthat I am unable to praise this work, you would certainly besurprised for a moment. But I cannot say otherwise. To praise itwould be to praise myself. Indeed the whole contents of the work,the path taken by your son, the results to which he is led,coincide almost entirely with my meditations, which have occupiedmy mind partly for the last thirty or thirty-fiveyears."

The resulting geometries were later developedby Lobachevsky, Riemann and Poincare into hyperbolic geometry (theacute case) and spherical geometry (the obtuse case).Theindependence of the parallel postulate from Euclid's otheraxioms was finally demonstrated by Eugenio Beltrami in1868.

Although best-known for its geometric results, the Elementsalso includes number theory. It considers the connection betweenperfect numbers and Mersenne primes, the infinitude of primenumbers, Euclid's lemma on factorization (which leads to thefundamental theorem of arithmetic on uniqueness of primefactorizations), and the Euclidean algorithm for finding thegreatest common divisor of two numbers.