What do the initials KCS stand for? Well infact it stands forseveral things but one that you may be familiar with is the KansasCity Southern Railway.
The KCS line is 1,711miles long, not one of the pioneer lines but it was built aftermajor settlement of the Midwest in an attempt to aid marketing ofthe fast growing productivity in the area. This resulted in manynew cities and towns such as Port Arthur, Texas,which is now one ofour nation's largest ports.

Let us now delve a little further into thehistory of the Kansas City Southern Railway.
Arthur Edward Stilwell was born in Rochesterin New York on the 21st of October 1859. His grandfather HamblinStilwell was one of the founders of the New York Central Railroadand he also worked in the building of the Erie Canal. As a boy hewas captivated by the conversations he overheard between hisgrandfather and Commodore Vanderbilt. One day the Commodore askedhim what he wanted to do when he grew up and he told the Commodorethat he was going to go west and build a railroad. Arthur went onto be the founder of the Kansas City
In his early career he worked at an insurancecompany. He was a good salesman. Once when looking at a map he sawthat there were fourteen hundred miIes between Kansas City andAtlantic Ocean but that if you were to run a railway due south fromKansas City to the Gulf of Mexico via the Texas coast, it would beonly eight hundred miles long, cutting the length of the journey byover a third. He realised this would enable businesses to make bigsavings in the shipping costs of their grain and other products. Heresigned from the insurance company and set out to build hisrailroad.
The first thing he did was to found a trustcompany, which did well because built low-cost homes on theinstallment plan, with the provision that the entire debt should becanceled upon the death of the buyer. The first subscriber forstock in the company was Edward Lowe Martin who was a former mayorof Kansas City. In 1886, he told Stilwell about an option he heldto construct a belt line railroad in Kansas City. The option wasdue to expire in two days and Martin needed funds.
Stillwell went all out to secure the funding, using the salestechniques and quick talking he'd learnt in the insurance salesbusiness, he managed to convince a financier that the option was agood investment and he secured the investment with a little time tospare. A telegram was immediately sent to purchase the option andthe deal was done.
The belt line had 40 milesof main track and the line connected with other railroads enteringthe city. It had a switching service to mills and stockyards,packing houses and grain elevators. A sixty five thousand dollarpassenger terminal was built and was named Grand Central Station.This depot served as an early Kansas City rail station until 1914when the Union Station was opened. it was demolished in the 1930's.Passenger service to Independence began on the Air Line, and tobring in custom, the Fairmount Amusement Park resort was built inMissouri in 1895, halfway between the two cities.
In 1896 we see the next bigevent in the Stillwell story - the McKinleyBryan campaign. Therailroadhad signed contracts for over two million dollars worth ofnew equipment, that was to bepaid by bond issue. The Dutchinvestors insisted that they would notbuy bonds until the electionwas over. Even worse than this, they stated that if Americavotedfor William Jennings Bryan and free silver, they would not buyany bonds ever. They were very nearly in receivership when Stilwellpersuaded them to let him gather a group of men from a list he hadscribbled down.

One of the names on this list was George MortimerPullman. A friend of Stilwell's grandfather The boys were goodfriends, and in 1898 Pullman gave Stilwell the first all steelbusiness car ever built by the Pullman Company.Apparently the carwas so luxurious that it was displayed at the Louisiana PurchaseExhibition,1904. It even contained a pipe organ to entertain thetravellers.

So Stilwell asked for a hundred and fifty thousanddollars from Pullman. Stillwell told Pullman that if Bryan were tobe re-elected, Pullman would end up broke, but he would be able toat least have helped his friend out. This technique worked, He thenwent on to use his great sales techniques on the rest of the peopleon his list. Every single one agreed and the company was saved.Eventhe Dutch investors bought their bonds as McKinley was elected in1896.

With this near disaster averted growing the businesswas again a prority. Carrying coal and woodbetween Arkansas andKansas was helping to bring in quite a lot of money.More trackswere laid down towards Texarkana and farther south grading was inprogress. At Shreveport, Louisiana the terminal facilities wereenlarged ready for when the line reached that far.

Then once again there were big decisions to be made.A chance to buy the Houston, East and West Texas Line arose. Thisran between Shreveport, Houston and Galveston,Texas. Buying up thiswould mean the company would not have to build south of Shreveport,and the line would reach right the Gulf at Galveston. What happenednext Stilwell referred to as his 'weirdest hunch of all'. On theevening night before a meeting of the Directors where the Galvestonline purchase was to be discussed, he suddenly felt an awfulfeeling of fear about what would happen to a city on the coast ifit were struck by a terrible storm. On the 8th of September1900,Galveston was hit by a massive hurricane. More than five thousandpeople died in that storm, and of course there was a huge amount ofdamage to buildings. Instead of going ahead with Galveston,Stilwell talked the directors into building a city that they wouldcall Port Arthur after Stilwell himself. This city would sit on theshore of Lake Sabine. The lake would provide a landlocked harbor tokeep Port Arthur safe from storms from the Gulf They would thenconnect Port Arthur to the Gulf of Mexico by means of a canal.

It took only 6 weeks to acquire forty thousand acresof land on the north shore of Lake Sabine. Many people wereattracted to the area and moved there. Rice grew very well in thearea and many Dutch people moved in to farm the rice.

Then another problem occurred. The railroad didn'town the land upon which they wanted to build the canal. The ownersof the land, realizing how vital it was to the company were askingfor a thousand dollars an acre for it. The actual value of the landwas probably more like 50c an acre. The Texas legislature passed abill permitting condemnation of the land under the right of eminentdomain,and fixing the price at two dollars an acre. The landownerstook the case to the Ways and Means Committee of the House ofRepresentatives. They decided in favor of the railway but only by amargin of one vote, so it was a very close thing. The canal wasthen soon underway and harbor facilities were built. Both the Kansas CitySouthern Industries and The Kansas City Southern Railway Companymade their home office at Eleventh and Wyandotte Streets, KansasCity, Missouri, where the Railway Company has been located eversince. They have had these office since they were constructed in1912.

While W. N. Deramus III took the role asChairman of the Board for KCSI, Thomas S. Carter presided over therailroad. He put a lot of time into strengthening bridges andimproving the track conditions to ensure they were suitable forheavycoal trains which were to serve the many new electricgenerating power plants all along the KCS lines. Succeeding him wasWilliam N. Deramus IV, who attracted new business such as themovement of rocket motor sections for NASA's space program. He wasvery keen on cleanliness and safety in the workplace for the railworkers.

Under the lead of George W. Edwards, whosucceeded William N. Deramus IV for the Presidency in 1991, theKansas City Southern carried trains of coal, grain, petrochemicalsand many other products to and from the Gulf of Mexico. KCSexpanded its area with the acquisition of the Graysonia, Nashvilleand Ashdown Railroad and MidSouth Railroad and purchase of ATSFproperty into the City of Dallas.

New, strong locomotives from ElectroMotiveDivision of General Motors are now used to pull the fast freighttrains over the KCS route between the Midwest and the Gulf. Moderntechnology is used throughout the rail system these days. Allsystem wide train dispatching can be handled from one centralizeddispatcher's office in Shreveport. Louisiana. Newvideoteleconferencing has been installed so that officials can seethe person they are talking with regardless of distance.

In May 1995, Michael R. Haverty was brought inas President of KCS, previous president of the Santa Fe.He has manyplans for the continued growth of the company.

These areas provide muchof the world's petroleum, chemicals,zinc, lead and bauxite,together along with an extensive production of coal, natural gas,timber, livestock and also grain.

On a visit to Amsterdamin Holland Stilwell was given information from various sourcesregarding how much the Dutch had lost in American railroad stocks.It seemed a difficult market until he met with a coffee merchantcontact of his called Jan DeGoeijen. DeGoeijenagreed to give up hiscoffee business and sell stock for the Kansas City, Pittsburg andGulf. He sold the whole three million dollars worth and it enabledStilwell to build a lot more railroad.

As the KCS Railway grew, towns were establishedalong the line. Stilwell decided to name some of these towns afterhis friends in Holland as a thank you for their faith andinvestments.

DeGoeijen became DeQueen, Arkansas (the namechange was purely to make it more pronouncible for Americans).Mena, Arkansas was named after DeGoeijen's wife. Hornbeck andDeRidder, Louisiana, Bloomburg and Nederland, Texas andVandervoort, Arkansas were all named after major investors. Zwolle,Louisiana, is taken from the Netherlands city of DeGoeijen's birth.Amsterdam, Missouri took the name of the Netherlands' capital.DeQuincy, Louisiana, honors Baron DeQuincy, Dutch nobleman andearly stockholder Mena, Arkansas, was made more popular as atown with the railroad workers being able to lay forty miles oftrack in forty days. Newspaper reporters loved the 'mile-a-day'story so it brought a lot of great publicity both the the railwayand to the town of Mena. Mena was in the spotlight again in June 22, 1898 with thebuilding of Wilhelmina Inn at Rich Mountain named after the Queenof the Netherlands, who was asked to open the establishment butsadly she never did.
KCS three mainsubsidiares are The Kansas City Southern Railway, Kansas CitySouthern de Mexico, and The Panama Canal Railway Company. Together,the three railroads serve over 450 cities and towns
There are several KCS subsiduaries and theyare worth a look at in a little greater depth:
KCS aren't all about profit, they do a lot ofwork to raise money for charity too. One of the big events of theyear for KCS is the Holiday Express train ride.

