ArizonaGame and Fish

Arizona is a great location for manyadventure seekers. If you are an angler, you will particularly love the widevariety of opportunities to enjoy fishing and nature. The weather is justgreat, the place inviting, and the resources abundant. For this reason, Arizonais a favorite spot for many vacationers from across the nation. Yet there arestill many other reasons why Arizona should come top on your travel list as ahunter or angler. Here is a guide on Arizona Game and Fish.

Fishing:The Many Lakes of Arizona

Arizona is home to numerous fishing lakes.The lakes hold an inimitable opportunity in themselves, as there are plenty ofdifferent fish species habiting the lakes. From boating to shore fishing, thereis at least a lake to suite everyone's fishing tastes.

Apache Lake: This is a favorite forfishermen looking too catch Catfish, Walleye, and the Yellow Bass. If you areto have a rewarding fishing experience, it is best to visit the lake in themorning hours. Do not laze around, lest you risk catching nothing. Also,remember to bring your own packed lunch. If Apache Lake does not make you wantto stay out the day, go check out the next lake.

Alamo Lake: Largemouth bass is the mainprize of this lake. If you bring your family along on your trip, this is thebest lake to visit for evening fishing runs when the fish is reportedly to bevery active.

Bear Canyon Lake: If you are after someleisure with your fishing, this is one Arizona's best lakes to frequent. Thisfishing lake is accessible via a short but steep trail that might prove fun foradrenaline junkies. Once on the lake, fishing is mainly on floating tubes orcanoes.

Bartlett Lake: This is one of the bestfishing lakes in Arizona to visit if you want to catch bluegills and largemouthbass. It is a great place to escape the hustle and bustle of the city lifesince it is located only 80 kilometres from Phoenix.

Fain Lake: This is an excellent fishingspot for anglers looking to catch the rainbow trout. The trout is healthy and big,making up for the occasionally slow fishing. Feel free to visit the lake anytime of the year, as the trout is stocked yearly.

Canyon Lake: Fishermen find this afavorite among Arizona fishing lakes. It is frequented by anglers searching forthe catfish, bass, and Bluegills. If you want some rainbow trout action, thisis your lake of choice. You will have difficult time fishing from the shore, soarrange for a boat and troll the waters. Also, do not oversleep; the best catchis always in the morning.

Lake Havasu: The Lake is a thrill foranglers looking to catch some healthy striped bass, catfish, and smallmouthbass. It is a favorite spot for fishermen looking to mix up things in theirfishing basket.

Lake Mary: This is the premier of allArizona lakes. If you want more rainbow trout than your SUV can haul, visit theupper portion of the lake. The lower portion is home to the unique NorthernPike.

You will have the best Arizona fishingexperience if you visit the lakes at night. Night fishing is fun in itself, butwhen it is Arizona, it is even more fun. At night, you will have the stars andthe beautiful night skyline to keep you company. Check with the Arizona Gameand Fish Department for more details on fishing and any other relevantinformation.

Hunting in Arizona

Arizonais one of the best hunting locations in the nation. If this won't be your firsttime hunting down in Arizona, you must already be privy to the diversity of habitatand wildlife that make for extraordinary hunting adventures. But if this willbe your first time shooting down game in Arizona, you are in for anunforgettable experience.

Whetheryou haul back a spike deer, a 6 by 6 bull elk, a handful of doves, or go home withnothing to show for your troubles, the adventures and the memories you create outin the wild with your family and friends will be some of the best times you'veever had.

Nonetheless,we accept as true that the future of game hunting, and the preservation of our naturalresources, is permanently associated with the enrolment of the youth to our honoredtraditions. We want to suppose that you will be lucky enough to spend the nightunder the stars, and if this is so, you will have an experience that will lastin your memories for ages to come. Sitting around a campfire away from thedistractions of your day to day life, and chatting away with your little onesis the most relaxing and traditional way of getting to know your kids.

Asthe wise said, proper planning prevents poor performance. Below are a few tipsto help you prepare well in advance and get your adventure started.

YOUTH/JUNIOR HUNTERS

Isn't great that theArizona Game and Fish Department understands and appreciates the place of theyouth in preserving one of America's oldest traditions? The Department, througha variety of activities promotes and supports introduction of children and theyouth to the ancient tradition of hunting. It is crucial that the cominggenerations understand and appreciate the role of hunting in conservation,preservation, and management of natural resources.

The Arizona Game and FishDepartment dedicates a whole range of juniors-only shooting and huntingprograms to get youth well inducted into hunting. The program is designed toget the child in the wild (field) with a guardian, mentor, or parent who doesnothing else but focus on the child. The role of the adult is to provideguidance and skills by the next generation of game hunters. It is also the roleof the parents to teach their children how to be ethical and responsibleenvironmentalists and conservationists.

SMALL GAME HUNTERS

Arizona is home tonumerous species of small game. In you are into bird hunting, you can pursueamongst others mourning doves, Eurasian Collared-Dove, Blue Grouse, three quailspecies namely Scaled, Mearns', and Gambel's, the white winged doves, geese,ducks, and the band tailed pigeon. Upland hunters can further go aftercottontail rabbits, hares, and five differing types of squirrels. Arizona'sopen country provides for unlimited opportunities to hunt fur bearing animalsand predators. You will be delighted to know that all that is required is aneasy to acquire general hunting license. However, you will need special type ofstamps if you are to hunt down waterfowl and migratory species.

ARIZONA IS ALSO RIPE FOR BIG GAME HUNTERS

Arizona is a famous spot for big gamehunting. It is renowned across the nation and the world over for its highquality big game. You have 10 big game species to keep your hunting adventurefun. All of these animals are reachable through public land pursuit, withoutrestrictions except relevant authorities. Be ready to take down animals such asthe black bear, desert bighorn sheep, javelina, elk, antelopes, buffaloes, muledeer, white tailed deer, turkey, and mountain lions. These animal species arestrewn all over the place, and you can expect to encounter them from the famousKaibab Strip to the rugged terrain of Kofa Mountains. Arizona offers arewarding big game hunting experience.

THESAFETY OF THE HUNTERS

Hunters in Arizona are not required totake any form of hunter education except for children in the age bracket 10 to13 years, who must hold valid hunter certification from an accredited Arizonainstitution or other state approved big game hunting program (Children arerequired to be at least 10 years old to hunt big game).

Nonetheless, every hunter is pushed toalways wear 'hunter orange' in most, if not all, hunting situations exceptduring the spring turkey season. Hunters are further encouraged to keep thesafe hunters' catchphrase 'tab plus one' - T.A.B.+1. Using the slogan, thehunters are encouraged to treat every firearm as if it were loaded; alwayspoint the muzzle in the safest direction; only shoot sure targets; and keep thefinger off the trigger guard until you are position to fire. In and aroundArizona, safety is all about avoiding terrible accidents.

Other than hunting small and big game, you can alsohave fun watching or shooting away at these waterfowl species.

Waterfowl Species in Arizona

The American Wigeon

How to Identify:

The males have white patches atop their headscomplemented by a gleaming checkered green patterning on both sides of theirheads. The Wigeon has white shoulders and green speculum on the green, as wellas gray feet.

This graceful duck is widespread across Arizonawhere it thrives in puddles rich in aquatic plant life. These elegant birds canoften be spotted along shores wading through the muddle and feeding on younggrass shoots. The Wigeon often flock together in large numbers of about 35 ducksalong the rivers, in stock tanks, and lakes of Arizona in search of feeding andresting areas.

The Blue winged Teal

How to identify:

This waterfowl species looks somuch like the cinnamon teal. Both the males and females have blue shoulderpatches adorning their wings. However, the male wears a white patch around itsbill. The feet as well as the bill are ashy to black in color.

Visit Arizona before October tocatch these rare beauties before they migrate south and out of the state. Ifyou are an early hunter, you can catch yourself a few blue wings. It is oftenvery difficult telling the two sexes apart in the field.

The Bufflehead

How to identify:

Male buffleheads wear a black andwhite coat that leads to a gleaming greenish/purple head. Young males andfemale buffleheads have gray heads with white patches. The bufflehead strutsaround on almost pink or bluish gray webbed claws.

These ducks are widespread acrossArizona, and the smallest of the diving ducks. They thrive on shallow wetlandswhere they feed on aquatic invertebrates and vegetation. The male wears a whitepatch for the chest, so it can be easily picked out in the field. They are fastflyers and will thrive in most reservoirs and lakes in Arizona.

The Canada Geese

How to identify:

Both genders of the Canade Geeselook the same, but the female is smaller in build. Camp around the ColoradoRiver in December to view as these geese arrive in Arizona. The birds can alsobe hunted in good numbers on the White Mountains. Roosevelt Lake and Payson arealso great destinations if you want to catch some Canada Geese action.

These birds feed close to theirloafing sites with grains and green forage. If they are not harassed by animalsor humans, they are in the habit of returning to their feeding areas. Usedecoys before dawn to catch you some geese.

The Canvasback

How to identify:

These birds stride gracefully onblack feet, and possess slender and sloping bills black in color. The wings aredecorated with gray and white vermuculation laid on a gray backdrop. You cantell the males apart by their copper heads on gray/white bodies.

The Canvasback is the largest ofdivers and thrives in large and deep lakes and reservoirs where they feed onsubmerged plants. It will utilize higher elevated water until ice forces themto migrate southwards.

The Cinnamon Teal

How to identify:

Both the males and females haveblue shoulder patches on the wings. The male cinnamon teal has a cinnamon shadeon its body with red eyes. The cinnamon teal has dark gray bills and orange/yellowfeet.

Cinnamon teal is the largest ofthe teal species. They are particularly common in the northern parts of Arizonaalong many rivers where they thrive on aquatic plant life. They also takeadvantage of mudflats in reservoirs.

The Common Merganser

How to identify:

The male Common Merganser iseasier to identify thanks to its bright orange to red bill that leads agleaming green head. The Merganser wears a white and black coat with shadingsof green throughout its body. The bird strides gracefully on orange feet. Thefemale Merganser has a gray body with a reddish orange head. It prances aroundon orange feet and fishes out aquatic plants with an orange bill. The bills ofboth genders feature serrated points to increase grasp.

This species of Merganser is acommon feature across Arizona. You will find the Merganser on almost all rivercourses and reservoirs throughout the state. The bird dives to catch its food(feeds on plants and small fish). Due to its 'special' diet, there arequestions raised about the palatability of its flesh.

The Gadwall

How to identify:

The male Gadwall has a black rumpatch and a speckled gray head. Both genders wear white speculums along theircinnamon shoulder patches. Their feet are yellow to orange in color. These birdsare a common species across Arizona.

More Hunting Facts AboutArizona

Arizonais a great hunting location, and as such, there is simply so much to learnabout the place and what it has to offer. Below, some more facts about thisfavorite hunting and fishing state.

Arizona welcomes every typeof hunter

Aslong as you hold a valid hunting license, you can shoot down about anything, ofcourse with the exception of people, in Arizona. You need to know your wayaround the various available licenses. Youth under the age of 14 are allowed tohunt without holding a license as long as an adult accompanies them. Nevertheless,they cannot hunt any big game before completing the Arizona Hunter Educationprogram.

Non-residentversus Resident Hunting License

A person is considered a resident ofArizona if they have lived in the state for more than 6 months prior toapplying for the hunting license. Non-residents are also allowed to apply to ahunting license to pursue small game and non-game birds with the exception ofswans, geese, and ducks.

Howdo to get a Fishing or Hunting License in Arizona

Thanks to the internet, a lot of businesscan now be transacted online from the comfort of your home. Fishing and huntinglicenses can be bought from Arizona Game and Fish Department's website or byphone using the toll free number 1-866-462-0433. If you order your licenseonline or by phone, you will receive a provisional license to use beforereceiving the regular license through mail. Remember to ask for your licensenumber when you make the call, as you will need it to apply for a huntingpermit tag using the draw method.

Howdoes one Apply for Hunting?

The Arizona Game and Fish Departmentprovides Hunt Permit-Tag applications via its website. These forms can also beobtained from persons issuing licenses. The law allows hunters to submit onlyone application per type of wildlife every year. You will need a separateapplication for each genus of wildlife you apply. A small fee is paid at thetime of application, only after which the applications are submitted for thedraw method.

Howto know whether or not you were drawn

For some unknown reason, the Arizona Gameand Fish Department will not send any notification of your drawing status toyour mail. It takes your initiative to call the department's automated callservice via 602-942-3000. Once you get through, press 2 then follow theinstructions. The department will also publish the draw status on theirwebsite. For either method, you will be required to provide a unique ID No. andyour date of birth. If you do not pass the draw, all your application fees arerefunded.

Timeswhen hunting is Legal in Arizona

In Arizona, there are open season when youcan hunt both small and big game. All the same, hunting at night or using artificialsources of light is illegal except for specific reptiles and nocturnal mammals.It is okay to hunt wildlife any time of the day.

ArizonaLocations where Hunting is Allowed

It is perfectly legal to take wildlife onlands owned or managed by the Arizona State Land Department, the U.S. ForestServices, or the Bureau of Land Management. In Arizona, land is mainly managedor owned by six entities, each with its own set of rules and regulations. Thesesix entities are the State of Arizona, National Wildlife Refuges, Bureau ofLand Management, the U.S. Forest Service, and the Indian Reservations. As longas you remain within the remits of their rules and regulations, you have littleto worry about.

FrequentContraventions of Law while hunting Migratory Birds, Small Game and Big Game

While we all try to uphold the law, somecommon mistakes are almost inevitable. While they are just that, mistakes, theystill attract penalties including fines and license revocation. Some of thefines can be as high as a thousand dollars. Some of these common violationsinclude, but not limited to:

a) Huntinggame without a license

b) Huntingusing artificial sources of light, using the moonlight, or during closed season

c) Goingabove the possession or bag limits

d) Huntinggame that is restricted

e) Inappropriatetagging of the big game

f) Takingwildlife from a vehicle

g) Providingwrongful information about your residency

h) Usingprohibited or banned hunting devices

i) Shootinggame near buildings or places of residence

j) Shootinggame across the road

k) Littering

ReportingViolations in Arizona

Say you witness violation of hunting orfishing laws, how do you as a responsible hunter or angler report theviolation? You must immediately report the violation to the Operation GameThief using the Hotline 1-800-352-0700.

Gettingmore information and hunting details in Arizona

The above few facts about hunting inArizona are just an overview. For more information regarding game and fishingin Arizona, you can get more detailed information from the Arizona Game andFish Department Website. Here, you will get more in formation on details such asArizona Laws, license fees, and such like information.

National Hunting and Fishing Day Events in Arizona

National Hunting and Fishing Day was established byCongress in 1971 to recognize hunters and anglers for their contributions towildlife conservation.

More than 100 years ago, hunters and anglers wereamong the first to realize that expanding civilization and unregulated markethunting were causing serious wildlife population declines, threatening thesustainability of many species. The efforts of hunters and anglers to changethat situation helped pave the way for today's science-based systems ofwildlife management, where regulated hunting/fishing and habitat management programshave restored and maintained sustainable wildlife populations for all to enjoy.

Today'swildlife conservation efforts are funded primarily by the more than $1 billionannually that hunters and anglers spend on license fees and excise taxes onsporting equipment.

These moniessupport wildlife conservation programs, habitat acquisition and outdoorrecreation opportunities in Arizona and throughout the country.

A number offree events will be held to provide the opportunity for people of all experiencelevels to learn about or enhance their knowledge of the great outdoors andoutdoor recreation pursuits.


Volunteer Program

Are you an outdoor enthusiast? Would you like to learn more about Arizona wildlife? Do you have outdoor skills you would like to share?

If you answered "yes," then the Arizona Game andFish Department's Volunteer Program may be just right for you!

The Game and Fish Department's Volunteer Program isdesigned to help department personnel accomplish their duties and provide anopportunity for volunteers to participate, firsthand, in managing Arizona'swildlife resources.

Our goal is to provide you with a congenial andcooperative atmosphere where you can build relationships with staff and othervolunteers, and gain knowledge about Arizona wildlife and wildlife management.We recognize your time is important and worthwhile and will strive to provide avariety of rewarding and educational volunteer experiences.

Volunteer Opportunities Include: Wildlife care, facility maintenance and office work at the department's wildlife center in Phoenix. Instructional work in our boating education classes, sport fishing program and Shooting Sports Program. Habitat restoration and clean-up projects, including the Adopt-A-Ranch Program. Firearms safety education and grounds maintenance work at the Ben Avery Shooting Facility in Phoenix. Construction of water developments for wildlife. A limited number of seasonal field projects and surveys.



Arizona Urban FishingFact Sheet

Did you know that... There are now a total of 21 lakes in the Program located in 11 cities. More lakes are expected to join the Program over the next few years. The $18.50 Class U (Urban) fishing license fee is the same price for non-residents too. The Class L, Super Conservation Fishing license is also valid at Program waters. This new combo license includes the Class A state fishing license, the Class U urban fishing license and the Trout Stamp packaged together for $53, a savings of $5 for Arizona residents. The Class L license for non-residents is an amazing deal at only $63, a savings of more than 50 percent. The Class U Urban fishing license is valid at all 21 Urban Fishing Program lakes that are located in the Phoenix metropolitan area, as well as Tucson, Sahuarita and Payson. Fish caught at all urban lakes are fun to catch and safe to eat. Over 55,000 urban anglers participated in fishing last year and accounted for over 650,000 angler recreation days. Over 200,000 pounds of fish are stocked annually in the urban lakes at a cost of more than $500,000. Trout cost about $2.50 per fish to stock and catfish cost about $3.50 each. That is less than you would pay for fresh fish at the market. The fish stocked in the urban lakes are not grown in state hatcheries, but purchased from private fish farmers. The channel catfish are being delivered all the way from fish farms in Arkansas, rainbow trout are grown and delivered from sources in Colorado, and sunfish come from farms in Arkansas. Last year, the department was involved in holding 74 fishing clinics at the urban lakes in Phoenix and Tucson reaching 5,000 people of all ages and capabilities.

An Urban Fishing Program Bulletin is prepared every two weeks with stocking information, fishing reports and other timely updates. You can get your own copy of our Urban Fishing Bulletin sent directly to you every two weeks by e-mail. To sign up, go to online services and enter your e-mail address, and check the box for the Urban Fishing Bulletin.



Arizona Huntingand Fishing Rules and Regulation

If you are a hunter or an angler inArizona, there are a few rules and regulations to keep in mind. The ArizonaGame and Fish Department through its legislature arms enacts these rules inorder to regulate hunting and fishing activities. If both are done withoutregulation, there is a risk of environmental degradation, general malpractice,and extinction of species.

Rules and Regulation



Checklist:

Process: Complete the application form andsecure approval through the Sport Fishing Education Coordinator of the ArizonaGame and Fish Department.

Application formneeded: Form 2726-A .Applicants will also file a report within 30 days of the event.

Fee: None

Permit valid: A permit is valid for only onefishing location as listed on the permit and up to two calendar dates asspecified on the permit. Specified fishing dates do not have to beconsecutive.



Over-the-counternonpermit-tags for elk are available for some hunt areas

Overview:



Checklist:

Process: Complete the application form andsecure approval through the Sport Fishing Education Coordinator of the ArizonaGame and Fish Department.

Application formneeded: Form 2726-A .Applicants will also file a report within 30 days of the event.

Fee: None

Permit valid: A permit is valid for only onefishing location as listed on the permit and up to two calendar dates asspecified on the permit. Specified fishing dates do not have to beconsecutive.

Additional informationneeded: Applicants shallsubmit evidence that they are licensed by or have a contract with theDepartment of Economic Security or the Department of Health Services for thepurpose of providing rehabilitation or treatment services to individuals orgroups with physical, developmental, or mental disabilities.