What is the Difference Between the GRE and the GMAT?
On the surface, the biggest difference between the GRE (Graduate Record Examination) and the GMAT is simply that the GMAT is intended to predict a candidate's suitability for a business and management related graduate program, whereas the GRE is a more general, cross-spectrum test that covers a wide range of different programs: Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, Biology, Chemistry, Computer Sciences, Science, Literature, English, Mathematics, Physics and Psychology.
However, the specific differences are small. With the GMAT you are expected to analyse given arguments, while the GRE requires you to do the arguing. The GRE is also a more abstract test which draws from many sources and disciplines for its examples, in contrast with the GMATs more concrete format. Another difference is the price, with the GRE costing only $140 while the GMAT costs $250.
Both tests measure writing skills, reasoning skills, critical thinking skills and verbal skills, although the GRE requires a higher level of English and writing skills that makes it somewhat more difficult for non-native speakers to get good scores. The difference is that the GMAT focuses on mathematical and analytical skills, and the GRE concentrates on measuring a candidate's skills in abstract thinking.
There is not, however, a great difference in the questions themselves. The GMAT, for example, does not contain questions that pertain directly to the business or financial fields. The GMAT does have the advantage, though, of being the tried and tested assessment used by business schools for more than 50 years, and it is likely to remain that way for many years to come, making it the first choice for any student wishing to enter a business school at the graduate level.

What Does the GMAT Include?
What is the Difference Between CAT and Paper-Based Testing (PBT)? Where do I take the GMAT?
There are hundreds of Test Centers all over the U.S.A, with most universities and graduate colleges providing the opportunity to take the GMAT. So, you will most likely find that you can take the GMAT at your local college or the school where you are studying for your undergraduate degree, even if you hope to do your graduate studies elsewhere.
If you are outside the USA, there are still plenty of testing locations in almost 100 countries, though some travelling may be required to reach your nearest testing location. For a full list of Test Center, both in the USA and abroad, see the following website: http://www.eduers.com/gmat/GMAT-Test-Centers.htm
Where Can I Get Free Sample GMAT Exa ms to Practice On?
There are many sites online that allow you to download free sample GMATs, but be sure of what you are getting before you download one. Most free samples contain only a handful of questions and are intended to entice you to purchase their full tests. Sample tests are also usually included in the prep classes on offer, so if you are buying coaching and tuition to help you prepare for the GMAT, make sure that the package you choose does include a selection of practice tests.
The first test is free, but you have the option of purchasing five more if you want to try again.
The website also includes free resources such as flashcards, an online, weekly study session, tutorials, tips and articles, as well as their selection of paid prep programs. If you purchase a program, all six practice tests are included.
You can make use of the advice and tips offered on many websites Any web search for GMAT is going to turn up hundreds of sites with information, tips, advice, practice tests, sample questions, you name it. Whatever you are looking for to help you with your GMAT preparation, you will find it online somewhere. Some of it you will have to pay for, but much of the advice and tips are free, offered as incentive to later purchase their paid products, tests, and tuition. Make good use of these sites.
However, not all website maintain the same quality; official university and college sites are likely to be of better quality than more anonymous sites. Check with friends who have taken or are preparing for the GMAT, and ask which sites they gained the most from. Ask your professors which sites they recommend. Remember, though, You can use study guides to steer you through your preparation You can practice on sample questions and tests Sample questions and practice tests are as close as you can get to the real GMAT while preparing. Even if you choose other methods for the bulk of your preparation, be sure to take at least one GMAT practice test, under timed conditions, before you take the real thing. The closer you can get to a real GMAT experience, the more value your practice test will provide. Some Testing Centers even offer the opportunity to take a practice test in the actual Testing Center. That level of authenticity is hard to beat, and will help eliminate any stage-fright jitters you might have when you walk through the doors of the Testing Center for your official GMAT.
What So rt of GMAT Prep Classes Are Available? GMAT prep classes, as with other prep classes, break down into three categories: classroom-based courses, online courses, and self-study courses. In addition, some course providers offer private tutoring; customized one-on-one GMAT prep. All these courses run the gamut from Basic or Comprehensive or Advanced courses, through specialized Math or Verbal courses, to crash courses.
Other than that all prep courses aim to prepare you for the GMAT, there are few common factors. Classroom-based courses differ in how much individual time you get, how much in-class practice you have, how much computer time you take, and more. Online courses may or may not include live "classroom" sessions, live Question and Answer chats with instructors, or courses offered in multiple time zones. Self-study courses may be online or book-based, and may or may not offer "support" services if you run into difficulties.

Who Provides GMAT Prep Classes? With thousands of GMAT prep courses available worldwide, it would be impossible to collate a complete list. Even a list of all the online courses would be unmanageable, and would not necessarily distinguish good courses from bad courses. Two of the most critically acclaimed GMAT course providers are The Princeton Review, and Kaplan.
The Princeton Review GMAT Prep Courses In addition to test prep courses, the Princeton Review also publishes study guides and college guides. By combining cutting edge technology with the company's test expertise, And since The Princeton Review has led the way in developing new products and innovative online tools to help students raise their scores on standardized tests, students can take their test preparation courses in the classroom, online, or mix and match as their needs dictate.
The Princeton Review's test prep methods , which have helped more than a million students maximize their scores and get into their top-choice schools, are based upon proven strategies.
Kaplan GMAT Prep Courses Kaplan was founded as a small test-prep company in 1938 by Stanley Kaplan. Today, it is an international company which helps more than a million students a year, worldwide, to prepare for most standardized tests, including the GMAT. What Do GMAT Prep Classes Cost? The cost of GMAT prep classes varies as much as the quality of the courses themselves. But don't be fooled into thinking more expensive is better. While the typical cost of Kaplan's courses is around $1,500 you might be able to find a course run by your local college for as low as $50.
On average, though, expect to pay somewhere in the region of $500 - $700 dollars for a shorter classroom course, or a generalized online course. The longer and more personalized the course is, the more you will have to pay. Be sure to check for extra costs; some courses include all the literature you will be using during their lessons, while other courses require you to purchase the books yourself in advance of the classes.
Generally speaking, courses provided by colleges tend to be cheaper than courses provided by for-profit companies, though the difference may only be slight.

Where Can I Find a GMAT Prep Class Near Me? All the Internet-based classes can, of course, be taken at your own pace no matter where you live in the world. If, however, you are looking for a local classroom-based course, your best bet is probably to ask at your local college. If you are still finishing up your undergraduate studies, the college where you are studying will either provide GMAT prep classes themselves, or they will be able to put you in touch with the local providers.

FAQ
