A mobile phone (also known as ahandphone, wireless phone, cell phone, cellular phone, cellulartelephone or cell telephone) is a long-range, electronic deviceused for mobile voice or data communication over a network ofspecialized base stations known as cell sites. In addition to thestandard voice function of a mobile phone, telephone, currentmobile phones may support many additional services, andaccessories, such as SMS for text messaging, email, packetswitching for access to the Internet, gaming, Bluetooth, infrared,camera with video recorder and MMS for sending and receiving photosand video, MP3 player, radio and GPS. Most current mobile phonesconnect to a cellular network of base stations (cell sites), whichis in turn interconnected to the public switched telephone network(PSTN) (the exception is satellite phones).


Prepaid cellphone planes used to be sketchy alternatives for those with lessthan stellar credit ratings, but not anymore. They can be ideal foranyone who's had enough of restrictive two-year contracts, scaryoverage fees, or micromanagement of cell phone minutes. Likewise,while they used to be more expensive than traditional plans,prepaid costs have begun to fall, and the plans have become justanother way to break into the cell phone game. As the popularity ofprepaid has skyrocketed, even the big brand-name carriers havejumped onto the bandwagon.
Prepaid plans are pretty self-explanatory: youopen an account and pay for airtime up front. When you run out ofminutes, you either pony up for more or, if you've had enough,simply let your plan expire. Want to switch carriers or cancel yourservice? No problem--you're not under contract, so you're free tojump ship anytime.
The Prepaid's Benefit The big advantage of prepaid is that there'slittle hassle and no commitment. By contrast, if you sign up for atraditional plan with a major cellular carrier, you'll likely signa contract binding you for a year or more. If, for some reason youdon't want to use your postpaid anymore, you will have to pay apenalty fee for this act. Another plus of prepaid plans is that youwon't have to endure a credit check; in some cases, you won't evenneed a credit card. With Virgin Mobile in Canada, for instance, youcan walk into a Virgin Mega store, grab a phone with prepaidminutes off the rack, plunk down your cash, and startdialing.
How To Use Prepaid Plan To get started with a prepaid plan, you buya phone and a set amount of service. For some carriers, you payspecifically for a bucket of minutes, ranging from 30 to 1,000; forother carriers, you buy the equivalent of a calling card (say,$25). When you use up your minutes or your calling card, your phonestops working, and you must buy more--thus, avoiding overagecharges. You can shop through the carrier's Web site, or you can goto a carrier store or a local retailer and buy your phone andminutes in person. While most carriers have simple plans where youjust buy minutes as you need them, others have monthly rates orauto pay options where your credit or ATM card is automaticallycharged a set dollar amount each month. As you make calls, theper-minute cost is deducted from the monthly amount until you haveno more money or time left.
Disadvantage of Prepaid While you might like the idea of no hassleor commitment, you'll pay a price for that convenience. First ofall, you'll probably end up spending more per minute over the longrun than you would if you signed a contract. This is especiallytrue for anyone who uses a cell phone several hours a week. Whileyou can get as low as 10 cents a minute with some prepaid carriers,there are often additional costs such as daily access fees(sometimes as much as $1 a day) or minutes that expire after just30 days. On the equipment side, prepaid-only carriers typicallydon't have the latest bleeding-edge phones, and the majors willlimit your handset choices. While some carriers are starting tobreak the trend (for example, the sleek Motorola Razr V3 offered byCingular and T-Mobile, as well as Verizon's prepay Razr V3c),others offer little more than budget models. So if you're dying toget a smart phone such as the Trio 700w, you'll have to sign acontract to do so or pay a premium for an unlocked version.Finally, with some prepaid carriers, you won't be able to port yourcurrent phone number over to a prepaid phone--and you can't takeyour prepaid phone number with you to another carrier. Be sure tocheck first.
How Much It Will Cost Most prepaid carriers charge anything from10 to 60 cents a minute, depending on the plan--and there are abewildering number of variations to consider. The bottom line isthat there's no one prepaid carrier with an exceptionally good orbad deal, just a dizzying array of variations that may or may notmake sense depending on how you use your phone. Read the fine printand consider the big picture before making yourchoice.
The Plans You Can Choose From Of the major U.S. carriers, Cingular,T-Mobile, and Verizon now offer prepaid plans. Meanwhile, othercompanies without the network infrastructure of the big fourcarriers are getting in on the act. These MVNOs (mobile virtualnetwork operators)--including Virgin Mobile, Boost Mobile,TracFone, and Liberty Wireless--buy huge batches of minutes fromthe traditional wireless carriers, essentially piggybacking onthose networks to offer their own brands of pay-as-you-go wirelessservice. While MVNOs didn't used to have the extra services thatthe big carriers did, such as text messaging, ring-tone and gamingdownloads, and Web browsing, that's beginning tochange.
Prepaid Plans From Other Carriers Alltel A smaller carrier, Alltel's coverageis almost nationwide, but significant areas remain where onlyroaming coverage is available.
Boost Mobile An offshoot of the staid,business-focused Nextel, Boost Mobile is a "lifestyle based" MVNOcarrier that's aiming squarely for the youth market. Armed withsnazzy versions of Motorola's sensible handsets and push-to-talk(PTT) walkie-talkie functionality on Nextel's I DEN network, Boostoffers some features not available on Virgin Mobile.
Liberty Wireless Launched in 2002 by InPhonic, a U.S.-based online seller of wireless products andservices, Liberty Wireless offers a generic, stripped-down prepaidservice through the Sprint PCS network.
TracFone Wireless A subsidiary of LatinAmerican wireless giant America M vil, TracFone offers a bare-bonesprepaid service that doesn't have the bells and whistles ofyouth-oriented MVNOs such as Virgin Mobile or Boost; however, ithas a large national service footprint thanks to its agreementswith a variety of wireless carriers, and its phones are availablein more than 65,000 retail stores.
