The Airports Council International compiles data on the busiest airports in the world, and publishes the list of the top 30 airports in terms of passenger traffic every year.

These are the 30 busiest airports in the world according to passenger traffic:

1. ATLANTA, GA (ATL)

San Francisco International Airport (SFO) is about 13miles south of San Francisco on US Hwy 101. All major carriers and many international airlines fly to SFO, with more international flights added every year. Full name - Newark Liberty International Airport Address/Phone Number - Building One Newark, NJ, 973-961-6000 Location, location, location - Major Airline(s) that serve the airport - EWR is a hub of Continental Airlines. Transportation to/from the airport Fun fact - Newark has a history that includes Amelia Earhart, who dedicated the Newark Airport Administration Building.

24 ORLANDO, FL (MCO)
25 TOKYO, JP (NRT)
26 SINGAPORE, SG (SIN)

27 MIAMI, FL (MIA)

28 SEATTLE/TACOMA, WA (SEA)
29 TORONTO, ON, CA (YYZ)
30 PHILADELPHIA, PA (PHL)



TSA Regulations
(Transportation Security Administration | U.S. Department of Homeland Security)

Prohibited Items Sharp Objects Sporting Goods Guns & Firearms Tools Martial Arts & Self Defense Items Explosive & Flammable Materials, Disabling Chemicals & Other Dangerous Items Other Items Sharp Objects Item Carry-on Checked Box Cutters No Yes Ice Axes/Ice Picks No Yes Knives - except for plastic or round bladed butter knives No Yes Meat Cleavers No Yes Razor-Type Blades - such as box cutters, utility knives, razor blades not in a cartridge, but excluding safety razors. No Yes Sabers No Yes Scissors - metal with pointed tips and blades shorter than four inches Yes Yes Swords No Yes NOTE: Any sharp objects in checked baggage should be sheathed or securely wrapped to prevent injury to baggage handlers and inspectors.
Sporting Goods Item Carry-on Checked Baseball Bats No Yes Bows and Arrows No Yes Cricket Bats No Yes Golf Clubs No Yes Hockey Sticks No Yes Lacrosse Sticks No Yes Pool Cues No Yes Ski Poles No Yes Spear Guns No Yes For more information, please read our Traveling with Special Items section.
Guns & Firearms Item Carry-on Checked Ammunition - Check with your airline or travel agent to see if ammunition is permitted in checked baggage on the airline you are flying. If ammunition is permitted, it must be declared to the airline at check-in. Small arms ammunitions for personal use must be securely packed in fiber, wood or metal boxes or other packaging specifically designed to carry small amounts of ammunition. Ask about limitations or fees, if any, that apply. Read our Firearms & Ammunition section. No Yes BB guns No Yes

Compressed Air Guns (to include paintball markers) - Carried in checked luggage without compressed air cylinder attached. No Yes Firearms - firearms carried as checked baggage MUST be unloaded, packed in a locked hard-sided container, and declared to the airline at check-in. Read our Firearms & Ammunition section. No Yes Flare Guns - May be carried as checked baggage MUST be unloaded, packed in a locked hard-sided container, and declared to the airline at check-in. Read our section on Camping. No Yes Flares No No Gun Lighters No Yes Gun Powder including black powder and percussion caps No No Parts of Guns and Firearms No Yes Pellet Guns No Yes Realistic Replicas of Firearms No Yes Starter Pistols No Yes NOTE: Check with your airline or travel agent to see if firearms are permitted in checked baggage on the airline you are flying. Ask about limitations or fees, if any, that apply.
Tools Item Carry-on Checked Axes and Hatchets No Yes Cattle Prods No Yes Crowbars No Yes Hammers No Yes Drills and drill bits (including cordless portable power drills) No Yes Saws (including cordless portable power saws) No Yes Tools (greater than seven inches in length) No Yes Tools (seven inches or less in length) Yes Yes Screwdrivers (seven inches or less in length) Yes Yes Wrenches and Pliers (seven inches or less in length) Yes Yes NOTE: Any sharp objects in checked baggage should be sheathed or securely wrapped to prevent injury to baggage handlers and Security Officers.
Martial Arts & Self Defense Items Item Carry-on Checked Billy Clubs No Yes Black Jacks No Yes Brass Knuckles No Yes Kubatons No Yes Mace/Pepper Spray - One 118 ml or 4 Fl. oz. container of mace or pepper spray is permitted in checked baggage provided it is equipped with a safety mechanism to prevent accidental discharge. For more information visit www.faa.gov., click on Passengers, then Preparing to Fly. No Yes Martial Arts Weapons No Yes Night Sticks No Yes Nunchakus No Yes Stun Guns/Shocking Devices No Yes Throwing Stars No Yes NOTE: Any sharp objects in checked baggage should be sheathed or securely wrapped to prevent injury to baggage handlers and Security Officers.
Explosive & Flammable Materials, Disabling Chemicals & Other Dangerous Items Blasting Caps No No Dynamite No No Fireworks No No Flares (in any form) No No Hand Grenades No No Plastic Explosives No No Realistic Replicas of Explosives No No Aerosol (any except for personal care or toiletries in limited quantities) No No Fuels (including cooking fuels and any flammable liquid fuel) No No Gasoline No No Gas Torches No No Lighter Fluid No No Common Lighters - Lighters without fuel are permitted in checked baggage. Lighters with fuel are prohibited in checked baggage, unless they adhere to the Department of Transportation (DOT) exemption, which allows up to two fueled lighters if properly enclosed in a DOT approved case. If you are uncertain as to whether your lighter is prohibited, please leave it at home. Yes No Torch Lighters - Torch lighters create a thin, needle-like flame that is hotter (reaching 2,500 degrees Fahrenheit) and more intense than those from common lighters. Torch lighters are often used for pipes and cigars, and maintain a consistent stream of air-propelled fire regardless of the angle at which it is held. Torch lighters continue to be banned. No No Strike-anywhere Matches - One book of safety (non-strike anywhere) matches are permitted as carry-on items, but all matches are prohibited in checked baggage. No No Flammable Paints (See Other Items below for non-flammable paints) No No Turpentine and Paint Thinner No No Realistic Replicas of Incendiaries No No NOTE: There are other hazardous materials that are regulated by the FAA. This information is summarized at www.faa.gov, click on Passengers, then Preparing to Fly. Disabling Chemicals & Other Dangerous Items Carry-on Checked Chlorine for Pools and Spas No No Small compressed gas cartridges
(Up to 2 in life vests and 2 spares) Yes Yes Fire extinguishers and other compressed gas cylinders No No Liquid Bleach No No Spillable Batteries - except those in wheelchairs No No Spray Paint No No Tear Gas No No NOTE: There are other hazardous materials that are regulated by the FAA. This information is summarized at www.faa.gov.
Other Items Item Carry-on Checked Gel-type candles No Yes Gel shoe inserts - Gel shoe inserts are not permitted, but shoes constructed with gel heels are allowed and must be removed and screened. Read more on our shoe screening policy. No Yes Non-flammable liquid, gel, or aerosol paint Yes - 3 oz. or smaller container Yes Flammable liquid, gel, or aerosol paint No No Snow globes and like decorations regardless of size or amount of liquid inside, even with documentation. No Yes
