Do you often wonder where thehours in the day go. Do you also wish you had an extra hour in theday, or better yet a clone of yourself to complete all the tasksyou need to do in one day? You are not alone. The majority of usfeel this way. While we can't add another hour, or clone ourselves(not yet anyways) we must make the best use of the time we do haveavailable, and there are some simple steps you are going to want toset aside time for. Do you arrive at your officemost mornings frazzled from too much rushing around before leavingthe house? Prepare for your departure the night before. Put yourcoat, car keys, and briefcase by the door, ready to grab, and setyour alarm fifteen minutes earlier. You'll start your day feelingmore in command.

Do you have a home officethat looks like a big bunch of crap? Probably, you've tried toorganize it before as you probably have various boxes on theshelves, but for some reason it just didn't stick. What? It doesn'tlook too bad, you say? Well, that's because you haven't shown methe close-up view. Let's start with the shelves - nothingunbearable there really. It's not completely organized, but atleast you can see the labels on everything and they're easilyaccessible. The only problem is that there are several of thesestacks lying around with no real order to them, right?! Okay,moving on to the other side of the desk. Here we probably have theperpetually over-flowing inbox. It's full of the papers that youcan never find and that you never know what to do with once they'refound. And now, the other side of the desk (wow, you saved the bestfor last). Wow, man, this is really embarrasing. Especially the doghair all over. This is what you've been living with for the pastseveral months?!
Let's see what the "Getting Organized"chapter of the "You can do it" book suggests. First, let me saythat this chapter is based on the advice of Meryl Starr, aprofessional organizer in New York. And I like how she said,"organization doesn't just look good, it feels good." Howtrue! Step 1: Select the space you want to clean.It can be a closet, an entire room, or a cabinet. Make sure thatyou have an appropriate amount of time to devote to the project andthat it can be done within that time frame. For obvious reasons, inour (better your) case we should choose the office space. It'sactually part of the den and sits in between the TV and yourhusband's computer desk?! OK, you live in a small house and have tomake do with the limited space you have. Step 2: Have your supplies that you'll needsuch as garbage bags and things with which to clean. Meryl suggeststhat you don't run out and buy a lot of cute boxes and things untilyou know exactly what you need. Step 3: Remove everything from the space thatyou are organizing and then clean. Take this step very literallyand remove everything from your desk and shelves (except for thecomputer) and then dump it onto the floor. Then you clean. I mean,you scrub those shelves until they shine! Now you almost don't wantto put anything back?! Perfect! But stop, leaving your pile on thefloor is not an option. Step 4: Separate your mess stuff into threestacks: 1) stuff to keep, 2) stuff to donate, and 3) stuff to throwaway. The object is to keep only those things that you need and toget rid of everything else. Meryl even includes a little pep talkabout why it isn't necessary to keep the shell you found whilewalking on the beach with your first boyfriend. She said that, "youcan hang onto the memory of your first love … without hanging ontothe physical memories." So sort and separate and finally come upwith your three piles. Throw away, Donate, Keep. Step 5: Now it is time to put everythingback. Things have been pretty easy until this point?!But now you break out in a cold sweat?! You probably have been downthis road before and were scared to try it again. I mean, beingorganized isn't a thing that comes naturally for you, you have towork at it. Hard. Just as you begin to wonder if it was worth theeffort and maybe you should just accept a life of slothfulness,you'll start to get ideas in your head. Mental images of what yourdesk could look like.
For instance, run upstairs and grab thetv/monitor that was sitting unused in your guest room. Hook it upbeside your computer so that it can act as your second monitor, oneto be used just for working on photos. Then follow some of Meryl'ssuggestions to take advantage of organizational tools such asdivider trays, boxes for CDs or photos, baskets, hooks, etc. Fileaway the extra magazines … and then rearrange your boxes. Make surethey have labels on them to help find things quickly.
A good idea at this point might be a quicktrip to The Container Store for some drawers. Things like these arethe key to keeping a desk organized - having a space for the littlethings to go. In the bottom drawer you could store a collection ofstationery. (Some people collect stamps, others collect coins. Icollect paper products.) In the next drawer, you can add an insertthat provides individual spaces for things like post-it notes,pens, and chapstick. And the top drawer is the place for yourmiscellaneous papers. Only this time, you have a system to use. Youshould put in three separate containers to help keep your papersfrom being thrown all over the drawer. Then, grab some of thesefantastic paper clips and write titles on them such as "file","urgent," and "miscellaneous."
Also while at The Container Store, youshould pick up such a great cord organizer. You probably don'trealize it, but behind that white "pipe" is about four differentcords. The idea is to try to hide them as much as possible sincethey can look very unsightly. I'm still working on hiding the othercords, but it's a start.
A few finishing touches for your desk suchas a clock, or a floating shelf (to be used for the books you arecurrently reading) and voila. You are done! Isn't that amazing?With all the extra space that was created, you now even have aplace for your new scanner.
Is it a lot of work? I won't lie to you - itusually takes several hours to unclutter an office space, thebetter part of a day really. Is it worth it?Absolutely!!
Okay, now that you're all fired-up and readyto get going, what space are you going to organize?
Decluttering other spaces It's basically the same like with an office desk. Make somelist and follow some very basic rules. For instance, a bathroom.