French Lick Resort Casino is a resort and casino complex located in the towns of West Baden and French Lick, Indiana. The complex includes two historic resort spa hotels, a casino and three golf courses. The casino opened for business on November 3, 2006 after a gaming license originally intended for Patoka Lake was transferred to French Lick. Honoring state law allowing only water-based gaming, it was originally designed as a riverboat and surrounded by a small pond (commonly nicknamed the Boat in the Moat). In 2008 the moat was filled in and the casino boat was converted into the state's first land-based casino.
The casino features more than 1,300 slot machines, and table games including blackjack, craps, roulette, and poker. However, the French Lick property continues to lag Indiana's 10 other casinos in every significant category including admissions, gross revenues and the average amount it wins from patrons at each slot machine and table game chair, state figures show.
The casino's fully automated poker room offers three 10-player tables and there's also a high-limit gaming area with VIP services including a dedicated cashier cage and lounge area.

The location was originally known as the French Lick Springs Hotel, a grand resort that catered to those who came to partake of the advertised healing properties of the town's sulfur springs. The first hotel was opened in 1845 and was an immediate success. The original hotel burned in 1897, but the resort was rebuilt on an even grander scale by new owner Thomas Taggart, mayor of Indianapolis and chair of the Democratic National Committee. He convinced the Monon Railroad to build a spur directly to the hotel grounds with daily passenger service to Chicago. The rich and famous were guests during the heyday of the resort, including Franklin D. Roosevelt (who announced his candidacy for president at the 1931 national Governors conference there), Ronald Reagan and numerous others. Casino gambling, though technically illegal, flourished near the resort (but not at the resort proper). The spring water known as Pluto Water was bottled at a plant across the street from the hotel for use on the property and for commercial distribution. Tomato juice is said to have been served for the first time at the hotel in 1917 when the chef Louis Perrin ran out of orange juice and needed an alternative.
The resort went into a steady decline with the Great Depression, enjoyed a brief revival during World War II, then went into decline again, particularly after the illegal casinos were shuttered by action of Indiana Governor Henry Schricker in 1949. The property went through a procession of owners, some of whom attempted to return the resort to its former glory. National Conventions of the Phi Kappa Tau fraternity were held at the hotel in 1940, 1953, and 1968.
Revival in earnest came when, after considerable campaigning by local residents, Indiana gaming authorities finally awarded a long-promised license for a riverboat casino to the city. The new casino was a bit slow to get into the water, after businessman Donald Trump was granted the original operating license, only to have it withdrawn for a variety of reasons. The license was finally awarded to a partnership of business interests from within Indiana including billionaire Bill Cook. Cook later bought out the partners after a legal dispute.
The historic 246-room luxury West Baden Springs Hotel in the adjacent town a mile away is also part of the Casino Resort complex. The hotel was built in 1902 and held the title of the largest free-spanning dome in the world until 1913. It remained the largest dome in the United States until the Houston Astrodome opened in 1965. The hotel was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1974, became a National Historic Landmark in 1987 and is a Historic Civil Engineering Landmark. In 2008 the West Baden Springs Hotel was cited by Cond Nast Traveler readers as one of the best mainland U.S. resorts.

Rate Range: Deluxe Resort Room: $149.00 to $289.00 Specialty/Suites: $500.00 to $1,850.00


A golf course known as the Hill Course was added in 1917 and was designed by Donald Ross. It hosted the 1924 PGA Championship won by Walter Hagen and also has hosted the 1959 and 1960 LPGA Championship and was the home of the Midwest Amateur from the 1930s through the 1950s. Pete Dye captured the 1957 Midwest Amateur on the course. In 2006-7 the course was restored to its original specifications in cooperation with the Donald Ross Society. The PGA will return to French Lick in June 2010 for the PGA Professional National Championship.

The Valley Links adjacent to the hotel and casino was originally designed as an 18-hole course by Tom Bendelow and has been altered to become a 9-hole course as a result of the casino construction.

A new course designed by Pete Dye has recently been completed. Mount Airie, Tom Taggart's 1928 Colonial-style home, located on the second highest point in the state has been purchased to serve as a guest house overlooking the course.
