Craziest of all is that we don't know much about Euclid at all. He was born (somewhere) around 325BC, and died approximately 60 years later in Alexandria, Egypt if history's true.


To this day Alexandria - s econd largest city in Egypt - has an atmosphere more Mediterranean than Middle Eastern, and well deserves its historic name "The Pearl of the Mediterranean" . That's because its ambiance and cultural heritage set it poles apart from Cairo that's 225 kilometers away.

Alexander the Great established it as a supply station in 331 BC while he was busy conquering the world as a surprisingly young man still. The settlement grew into the capital of the Graeco-Roman Egyptian Empire. Sailors found it easily (even at night) because it had a huge lighthouse called "Pharos" that was one of the Seven Wonders of the World.


It was a romantic place too. After the crude orgies and drunken bouts it's said Alexander engaged with in company of his lusty soldiers, he planted rows of palm trees along the River Nile, and built galleys to sail upon it. That's where the stormy affair between Mark Antony and Cleopatra took root, although quite what this has to with geometry eludes me. Alexandria was a center of learning in the ancient world. But it had reverted to a sparsely populated fishing village by the time Napoleon Bonaparte discovered it, and many tourists choose to avoid it these days.
Science and technology were respected skills in Ancient Egypt, although they did also have magical / religious aspects to them too. The people believed that Thoth ( the most popular and enduring of all their gods and responsible for keeping Egyptian magic in the forefront of learning ) was the inventor of both astrology and mathematics. Indeed, he was revered as the god of wisdom and of magic too. Hence Egyptians applied themselves to practical applications of mathematics only (as opposed to abstract concepts which belonged in the world of religion).

This knowledge was given to them by the gods to solve the practical problems experienced by engineers, tax collectors, and military officers - and formed the basis of mathematics, land surveying and even agriculture. Orion's constellation was linked with Osiris god of the dead. Hence the orientation of temples and funereal pyramids likewise needed to be placed precisely.

Similar attention as also was given to the positioning of flowers, fruits, and vegetables when used for rituals for the dead and aesthetic purposes. Trees were likely positioned carefully too, for they were thought to be the abode of supernatural beings and even gods Euclid of Alexandria (if that really was his name and he was an individual who actually lived) remains one of the most famous names in mathematics. Proclus - the last major Greek philosopher who was around in the 5th Century, opined that: "not much younger than the pupils of Plato was Euclid, who irrefutably demonstrated the things which had been previously only loosely proven." Most historians consider the advice provided by Arab writers that Euclid was the son of Naucrates and born in Tyre entirely fictitious, and pure hyperbole (although his the latter's birthplace of Tyre certainly does still exist).
Controversially, others allege that Euclid was actually born at Megara, although they confused our Euclid with Euclid of Megara , who lived about 100 years earlier in that colony.
The first point to note is there is nothing suspect in the inconsistent dates. That's because they had no calendars and historians were more at pains to hammer fragments into logically consistent narratives. However, although we do not know indubitably to which chapter of Archimedes' work Proclus refers to, the argument was judged well and good until Hjelmslev challenged it in the 1930's.

Hjelmslev went as far as arguing that the reference to Euclid was added to Archimedes' book by a third party at a later stage. Indeed I must confess that I encounter it as a rather surprising inconsistency. Moreover, it was not the custom at that time to give such references to third parties. There are none elsewhere. Plagiarism ruled in ancient times. Case closed. Accused dismissed.
However Bulmer-Thomas seemed to disagree when he wrote ... although it is no longer possible to rely on this reference, a general consideration of Euclid's works ... still shows that he must have written after such pupils of Plato as Eudoxus, and before Archimedes." Did Euclid Really Exist? Historians have narrowed the answers to just three. I add a fourth after I list these


(i) Euclid was a historical character who wrote the Elements and the other works attributed to him. (ii) Euclid was the leader of a team of mathematicians working at Alexandria. They all contributed to writing the 'complete works of Euclid', even continuing to write books under Euclid's name after his death. (iii) Euclid was not an historical character. The 'complete works of Euclid' were written by a team of mathematicians at Alexandria who took the name Euclid from the historical character Euclid of Megara who had lived about 100 years earlier. There is quite convincing evidence accept that Euclid was a historical character who wrote "The Elements" and the other works attributed to him . After all, everyone believed this for more than two thousand years and there is little evidence to disprove this even now. While it is true that there are stylistic differences between some books, other authors have varied their style as they evolved. Besides, Euclid undoubtedly based "his" Elements on previous writer's works whose style inevitably knocked through. Moreover Euclid undoubtedly built up a mathematics school at Alexandria, and (like most researchers) may well have enlisted the help of his better students.
However theory (ii) goes much further than this, by suggesting that different books were written by different mathematicians. Other than the differences in style referred to above, there seems little direct evidence to prove this.

Theory (iii) that Euclid's are the work of a team of mathematicians at Alexandria (named after Euclid of Megara) may however not be as fanciful as they first seem. After all, a group of French students formed a group in 1934 to write a treatise under the name of Bourbaki. If this was not Reverse Plagiarism, then what else was it?


In this way, André Weil, Alexander Grothendieck, Claude Chevalley, Henri Cartan, and Jean Dieudonné collectively created thirty volumes of Bourbaki's Eléments de Mathématiques which is still appreciated today for its substance.
Apollonius of Tyrana (who was a pupil of Euclid in Alexandria) appears to support theory (ii) in that he states ".... Euclid did not work out the syntheses of the locus ... but only a chance portion of it ... . However this does not prove irrefutably that Euclid existed historically. After all, many prominent mathematicians refer to "Bourbaki" as it he really existed as an individual (when they know this not to have been the case).
This tends to suggest that, were theory (iii) true, then the "Euclid Gang" would have been well known as individuals in their own right. But we have no knowledge of them whatsoever.
Hence it seems most likely there there was an individual who wrote "The Elements" named Euclid. However the possibility that some associates and even students collaborated is not excluded. And why not? Even the great Michelangelo allowed his favorite pupils to work on less important aspects of his great fresco's. Euclid's Historic Context One great frustration is that not one of Euclid's works is provided with a preface. These might have revealed something his character (which Pappus describes was "... most fair and well disposed towards all who were able in any measure to advance mathematics, careful in no way to give offence, and although an exact scholar not vaunting himself ..."). Some say a third party added the words I quoted to Pappus' work, especially as it speaks negatively of Apollonius further in the chapter.


Stobaeus who relates the following concerning Euclid. When a trainee geometry student asked Euclid "What shall I get by learning these things?" Euclid called his slave and said "Give him threepence since he must make gain out of what he learns" (although I'm not convinced they had British tickeys in those days.
Euclid's Mountain Top Without a shadow of doubt his most famous work is his treatise on mathematics that he called "The Elements". It was a compendium of knowledge that became the heartland of maths teaching for 20 Centuries, although perhaps none of it was his original thinking, or so it seems. What the work does do though is to organize the material from various sources into a cohesive whole.
In this regard it's quite compelling to note that Euclid is quite clearly using earlier textbooks, since he defines words such as "oblong", ":rhombus", and "rhomboid" that he does not refer to elsewhere. Euclid starts with these definitions followed by five postulates.
Postulates (Considered Proven)
First Three Postulates
The first three of these are postulates of construction (for example the first postulate states that it is possible to draw a straight line between any two points). This implicitly assumes the existence of points, lines, circles and other geometric objects that are deduced from the fact that they exist. Other assumptions in the postulates are not explicit though. For example, Euclid assumes that there is a unique line joining any two unique pairs of points. Similarly postulates two and three (on producing straight lines and drawing circles respectively) assume the uniqueness of the objects the possibility of whose construction is being postulated. Fourth and Fifth Postulates
The fourth and fifth postulates are markedly dissimilar. Postulate four states that all right angles are equal. While this may seem "obvious" it exists in a paradigm that assumes all space is homogeneous - in other words that a figure will be independent of the spatial position in which it exists. The fifth (parallel) postulate states that one and only one line can be drawn through a point parallel to a given line. It was not until the 19th century that this postulate was dropped, and non-euclidean geometries became the subject of serious study. Notions (not proved but considered self-evident)


These are n ot specific geometrical properties, but rather general assumptions (axioms which Euclid calls 'common notions') which allow mathematics to proceed as a deductive science. For example things which are equal to the same thing are equal to each other .

who seems to have been the first to show that Euclid's propositions were not deduced from the postulates and axioms alone, but also other subtle assumptions) Chapters of the Elements


"The Elements" is divided into 13 Books. Books 1 - 6 deal with plane geometry ( a plane being an infinite continuum of two dimensions, in the same way that space is an infinite continuum of three dimensions. ). Books 1 - 2 define the properties of squares, triangles, parallels, parallelograms, and rectangles. Book 3 describes the properties of circles while Book 4 deals with circle problems as set out by the followers of Pythagoras. The work of Eudoxus on proportion as applied to commensurable and incommensurable magnitudes is the subject of Book 5 (as extended in terms of plane geometry in Book 6 ).


Books 7 - 9 discuss number theory. Within that, Book 7 includes Euclidean algorithms for finding the greatest common divider of 2 numbers. Book 8 attempts numbers in geometrical progression, although van der Waerden (who in the first half of the 20th Century writes that it contains ".. cumbersome enunciations, needless repetitions, and even logical fallacies." Thus is seems that Euclid's expositions were only as good as the sources at his disposal. Books 9 - 10 address irrational numbers based mainly on work by Theaetetus (although Euclid did alter the proofs of several theorems in terms of newer definitions of proportions that Eudoxus subsequently developed. Books 11 - 13 discuss three-dimensional geometry in some detail, with Book 11 providing common definitions, and the other two following a format similar to the two-dimensional analogues of Books 1 - 4 . Book 12 demonstrates that circles are comparable in terms of squares of their diameters, while spheres relate in terms of cubes of their diameters.
"The Elements" ends with Book 13. This is a discussion of the five regular polyhedra and proves that there are no more. This is clearly copied from an earlier treatise by Theaetetus, who Commentary


While the originality of Euclid's "Elements" does not stand well in terms of originality, it is nonetheless remarkable for the clear way in which the postulates, notions and theorems are set out, explained and proved. Indeed this rigorous standard was adopted for calculus that followed centuries later. As Heath himself says "this wonderful book, with all its imperfections, which are indeed slight enough when account is taken of the date it appeared, is and will doubtless remain the greatest mathematical textbook of all time ... even in Greek times the most accomplished mathematicians including Heron, Simplicius, Pappus, Porphyry and Proclus wrote commentaries on it, while Theon of Alexandria re-edited it with a view to greater clearness and consistency...". Here it's relevant that Theon was " Our earliest glimpse of Euclidean material will be the most remarkable for a thousand years, six fragmentary ostraca containing text and a figure ... found on Elephantine Island in 1906/07 and 1907/08... These texts are early, though still more than 100 years after the death of Plato (they are dated on palaeographic grounds to the third quarter of the third century BC); advanced (they deal with the results found in the "Elements" [book thirteen] ... on the pentagon, hexagon, decagon, and icosahedron); and they do not follow the text of the Elements. ... So they give evidence of someone in the third century BC, located more than 500 miles south of Alexandria, working through this difficult material... this may be an attempt to understand the mathematics, and not a slavish copying ..." A Fascinating Angle Concluding Statement
Over 1,000 editions of "The Elements" have been published, pored over, frustrated schoolboys and been debated since the first 1482 printing. From its earliest days Euclid's magnum opus has exerted an ongoing significant influence on most aspects of human life. It remained the primary source of geometric reasoning until non-Euclidean geometry arrived in the nineteenth century. Would it be heretical to aver that, after the Holy Bible, "The Elements" may be the most translated, published, and studied compendium of books ever to have existed?
Other documented works of Euclid include: Data - that examines the properties of figures that can be deduced when other properties are given On Divisions - which considers constructions to divide a figure into two parts with areas of a given ratio Optics - the original Greek work on perspective Phaenomena - an elementary introduction to mathematical astronomy
The following Euclidean treatises all to have all been lost: Surface Loci, Porisms, Conics, Book of Fallacies, and Elements of Music.

A lecturer once told me that he considers " a consecutive passage of text which has been lifted from another document and possibly paraphrased" to constitute a plagiarism case, although there are other genres of plagiarism too, like claiming another person's scientific discoveries, or copying a tune that they composed.
Euclid may not have been a first class mathematician. However the enduring nature of "The Elements" could earn him the title of the leading mathematics teacher of antiquity, or perhaps even of all time. As a final personal note may I mention that my first school mathematics textbook was an extract from Euclid's Elements. For indeed we have always been a little backward in Africa, and might have preferred to be out on the rugby field instead