Many people long to become a DJ and many people do manage to fulfill their dreams. If you dream of becoming a Radio DJ you'll need to have a nice voice for a start. If you are a student, good courses to study if you are aiming for a career as a radio DJ would be drama, speech and English. Your drama teacher might be able to give you some tips on voice projection.

All your books are included and they are sent to you for free. You also get a website when you join the course, and you'll be fully trained in using the Internet to market your business. You can choose to be paired with a broadcaster local to you for three or six months.

Any work experience you can get is well worth it. Volunteering at hospital or student radio stations. You'll get a lot of experience, not just in being a radio DJ but also in the running of a radio station, and what to do when things go wrong. Remember to tape your shows, listening back to them will help you improve your performance, and it's also a valuable asset to have when applying for jobs. Potential employers can listen to the show for themselves. A radio DJ needs to know how to stay in control in any situation live on the radio. From an equipment malfunction to a troublesome guest. Any work experience you can get at a commercial radio station you should grab with both hands. S ometimes it can lead to a permanent position, but it will also put you in good stead if you later apply for a job with that station if they know you already. Make a good impression during your work experience and it may well be remembered. Remember, it's not all about being charismatic on the airwaves. Having a friendly manner with the other staff, being professional and being punctual are all important qualities for a radio DJ. If you prove you have these skills during work experience, it will put you at an advantage to other applicants whom the employers have never met. Most work experience jobs at a radio station won't be broadcasting, you'll be running about doing errands and making the tea most likely, but you can observe and learn, and it's a chance to show them that you are committed, efficient and a quick learner, so do your best if you get this type of opportunity. If you're submitting a demo tape to showcase your skills, do your research. Work out what type of music the station plays and what it doesn't play.Work out the station's image, sound, and overall style of presentation.

You could even set up your own mobile disco business. It's a great way to learn and extra money. You can easily do this around college or a job as most events are on a weekend or in the evening. Of course you will need some equipment so you will need to make an investment in your business. To run a successful mobile disco you need to be When applying for entry level jobs at radio stations, bear in mind that the smaller the station is, the more likely you'll be able to broadcast on air yourself. The bigger the station, the harder it will be to move up within the station. Gain experience with a smaller community station and then use this to apply for other jobs with larger stations. Do you dream of becoming a Club DJ? It's a common dream for many young people today, but that doesn't mean it's unattainable. There's a lot to learn to be a DJ. You'll need to know about all the equipment, and about the technical aspects of music, pitch and tempo. The best way to learn is to watch other DJs. If you can find an experienced DJ to mentor you, then this would be ideal. Offer help with carrying their gear in exchange for some advice and you could find that you are able to learn an awful lot. Remember too that being a Club DJ isn't all about having fun and partying. You're not likely to make a living being a Club DJ at first, so you may well have to work nights as a DJ then get up early to do your day job. Nightclubs aren't necessarily as much fun when you're sober, you're having to work, and have to get up early the next morning. You may also have to take into consideration your family if you are working late nights.

One of the most important aspects of becoming a good DJ is practice, so having a room in your home set up is a great idea. You'll also need plenty of time on your hands, and a lot of energy too. You should think carefully about whether or not you want to become a DJ before you buy the equipment as it is very expensive for proper professional gear. If you can try out the equipment of a friend then do so. See how you take to it. Ask your friend if they think you've got what it takes.

SEDA members have access many benefits to help with their business and to learn new DJ techniques.