If you just found out that you have diabetes or want to know more about the disease, this article will help you answer your questions.
the different types of diabetes, including their causes, risk factors, symptoms, and complications What is Diabetes? Diabetes is a chronic disease in which the body does not make or properly use insulin-- Serious organ damage can result from diabetes, especially if left untreated. The trouble begins when blood glucose levels become elevated. This is due to a lack of sufficient insulin production, or the body failing to recognize and use the insulin properly.
Insulin is a hormone that is needed by the body to convert sugar, starches, and other food into energy by moving glucose from the blood into the cells.

People with diabetes have increased blood glucose levels for one or more of the following three reasons:
no insulin is being produced, insulin production is insufficient, and/or the body is resistant to the effects of insulin.
Diabetes affects almost 24 million Americans and people may be at risk and not know it

With proper care from your diabetes team and yourself, this disease, unlike many other diseases, may be managed and complications can be reduced, delayed or even prevented.People living with diabetes may require daily insulin therapy depending on the type of diabetes a person has and how well his body can able to process insulin.


There are different kinds of insulin , but all serve the same basic purpose. Insulin may be rapid-acting, short acting, intermediate, long-acting, or pre-mixed. Which insulin is taken is determined by factors such as: how the individual patient's body reacts to insulin
how quickly the reaction is, the frequency and ability to take multiple injections age, target glucose levels lifestyle and activity.


Only a doctor can determine the right insulin to take, and adjustments are likely to be made to achieve maximum benefits. Insulin dosing schedules will vary similarly, and are also dependent upon the type of insulin being taken. More than half those living with diabetes can eventually expect to experience neuropathy, a tingling sensation (or lack of any feeling) in the extremities brought on by insufficient blood flow. In severe cases, especially when coupled with untreated ulceration, bone infection can occur and lead to the need for amputation.


DIAGNOSING DIABETES

The information provided in this article is intended to improve your general knowledge concerning diabetes and for educational purposes. The information in this article cannot substitute for professional medical advice, nor does it replace the medical judgment of a licensed healthcare professional.

Diabetes is diagnosed when the fasting blood glucose level is greater than 126 mg/dl on two separate testing dates, or if the blood glucose level is over 200 mg/dl with the presence of hyperglycemia (high blood sugar) symptoms.

Also, some physicians will order an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) to confirm a diabetes diagnosis. Tests are used for diagnosis: An oral glucose tolerance test measures your blood glucose after you have gone at least 8 hours without eating and 2 hours after you drink a glucose-containing beverage. This test can be used to diagnose diabetes or pre-diabetes. In a random plasma glucose test, your doctor checks your blood glucose without regard to when you ate your last meal. This test, along with an assessment of symptoms, is used to diagnose diabetes but not pre-diabetes. A fasting plasma glucose test measures your blood glucose after you have gone at least 8 hours without eating. This test is used to detect diabetes or pre-diabetes.

Positive test results should be confirmed by repeating the fasting plasma glucose test or the oral glucose tolerance test on a different day.

Fasting Plasma Glucose (FPG) Test - The FPG is the preferred test for diagnosing diabetes due to convenience and is most reliable when done in the morning Plasma Glucose Result (mg/dL) Diagnosis 99 and below Normal 100 to 125 Pre-diabetes
(impaired fasting glucose) 126 and above Diabetes*

*Confirmed by repeating the test on a different day.


Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT)

Research has shown that the OGTT is more sensitive than the FPG test for diagnosing pre-diabetes, but it is less convenient to administer. The OGTT requires you to fast for at least 8 hours before the test. Your plasma glucose is measured immediately before and 2 hours after you drink a liquid containing 75 grams of glucose dissolved in water. If your blood glucose level is between 140 and 199 mg/dL 2 hours after drinking the liquid, you have a form of pre-diabetes called impaired glucose tolerance or IGT, meaning that you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes but do not have it yet. A 2-hour glucose level of 200 mg/dL or above, confirmed by repeating the test on another day, means that you have diabetes. 2-Hour Plasma Glucose Result (mg/dL) Diagnosis 139 and below Normal 140 to 199 Pre-diabetes
(impaired glucose tolerance) 200 and above Diabetes*

*Confirmed by repeating the test on a different day.


Gestational diabetes is also diagnosed based on plasma glucose values measured during the OGTT. Blood glucose levels are checked four times during the test. If your blood glucose levels are above normal at least twice during the test, you have gestational diabetes. Table 3 shows the above-normal results for the OGTT for gestational diabetes.

Gestational Diabetes: Above-Normal
Results for the Oral Glucose Tolerance Test When Plasma Glucose Result (mg/dL) Fasting 95 or higher At 1 hour 180 or higher At 2 hours 155 or higher At 3 hours 140 or higher

Note: Some laboratories use other numbers for this test..

Every time you eat, the food is converted by your body into glucose (sugar) to fuel cells for energy. Insulin, a hormone produced by pancreas, that makes this process to work must be present to transport the sugar to the cells from the blood. In people who produce little or no insulin, glucose builds up in the blood instead. When blood sugar remains too high, headache, blurry vision, dull skin, and frequent urination are sure to follow. Having a sweet tooth isn't necessarily a precursor to diabetes. However, a sensible diet low in fat and refined sugar does provide resistance.


According to Ruchi Mathur, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine at the Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, "It's a matter of smaller portion sizes more than anything else. Some people go to extremes by avoiding starches, but it doesn't work that way." Instead, she recommends limiting simple carbohydrates such as sodas, breads, and pastas made from white flour and other highly processed foods.


Most people dont realize that 1 slice of bread or 1/3 cup of cooked rice breaks down into 4 teaspoons over one tablespoon of sugar in the bloodstream.

You can somehow prevent diabetes and its complications by knowing the symptom.

Approximately, there are 21 million people in the United States have diabetes, and one million new cases of diabetes are diagnosed each year aside from those who have remained undiagnosed. Diabetes is a disease of excess sugar (glucose) in the blood. Men and women of all ages and ethnic groups are affected and can be affected by diabetes. And if goes undiagnosed, it could become life threatening.

If you are experiencing any of these symptoms you should see your doctor as soon as possible to rule out the possibility of a serious problem. accounts for 5-10% of diagnosed diabetes, occurring most commonly in children and young adults, and requires daily insulin injections the pancreas may produce adequate insulin, but for some reason the body ignores it, setting up insulin resistance. But the good news is that type 2 is largely preventable - even reversible - with proper care.

In Type 1 diabetes, symptoms of high blood glucose (sugar) appear suddenly or quickly, while in Type 2 diabetes, the symptoms appear more gradually over time. However, with increased physical activity and modest weight loss, persons with pre-diabetes may prevent development of Type 2 diabetes. According to the American Diabetes Association, there are 12,000 to 24,000 cases of blindness are reported in diabetic patients ranging 20-74 years of age annualy, primarily due to damage to eye vessels by high blood glucose levels. However, with good blood sugar control, approximately 76% of eye damage can be prevented.
Nephropathy, or kidney disease - is another complication of diabetes that is characterized by the presence of too much albumin (protein) in the urine. Unfortunately, this usually remains undetected until too much damage has occurred, possibly renal failure. However, elevated blood pressure and triglyceride levels are often early warning signs.

Did You Know? About 73% of adults with diabetes have high blood pressure. Heart disease and stroke account for about 65% of deaths in people with diabetes. About 60% to 70% of people with diabetes have mild to severe forms of nervous system damage. More than 60% of non-traumatic lower-limb amputations occur in people with diabetes. Mexican Americans are almost twice as likely and non-Hispanic blacks are almost 50% as likely to develop diabetic retinopathy as non-Hispanic whites.

In 2005, 46,739 people with diabetes began treatment for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and in 2002, a total of 178,689 people were living on chronic dialysis or with a kidney transplant. With good blood sugar control people with diabetes can reduce damage to their kidneys by 35-56 percent.

The diabetes communities are now forced to respond and acknowledge three choices due to the number of diabetes patients that continually growing: to prevent or get away with the disease to have it cured before it gets worse
to take care and watch over the people who have it already.
This is to prevent the different complications associated with the disease, because it can be very devastating.

All the above mentioned approaches are now being worked out by the National Institute of Health (NIH) and the Center for Disease Control (CDC). The former is involved in research works to come out with different methods to cure and prevent both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

For the meantime, the NIH is only focusing on the prevention of Type 1 diabetes. While the Center for Disease Control (CDC) is focused mostly with the programs they are doing. Both health providers are gathering important research and science that will help people to fight diabetes.


The approaches that are currently being pursued for the possible cure for diabetes are:
transplantation of the pancreas and islet cells
development of an artificial pancreas
genetic manipulation

Diabetes is a dreadful disease that has caused millions of death worldwide. Is there a cure for diabetes? Not just yet. However, researches and studies have been made to uplift the situation of diabetic patients. It is still in a development stage but all the approaches present helpful treatments for this disease.


Diabetes is treated depends on varying factors:

The type of diabetes a person is diagnosed with
the progression of the disease prior to diagnosis
accompanying complications will factor into the treatment equation early on.
Living with diabetes is a matter of learning to control blood sugar levels through lifestyle and medication. The basics of diabetes treatment are the same for all patients once baseline sugar levels are determined and target sugar levels are in control.

Two things are basic to treating type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes:

1) Maintaining a healthy diet and physical activity are key basic steps, and

2) Testing to monitor blood glucose levels, so adjustments can be made to diet and exercise when called for.


Type 2 diabetes patients may take additional oral medications (with or without insulin) to help control blood glucose levels at target rates or they may control their blood sugar with meal planning and exercise only.


Insulin injections are a necessity for type 1 diabetes patients. People with diabetes require no more special diet than the average person who eats healthy. Advancements in the understanding of diabetes have revealed that while a healthy diet is vastly beneficial to people living with diabetes, there are no special diet foods required by diabetics.


The difference in diet for a person with diabetes is creating a consistent diet routine, balancing fats, proteins, and carbohydrates in particular. Carbohydrates turn to sugar in the blood, so limiting carbohydrates and being aware of carbohydrate intake is essential to good diabetes control.

Eat a variety of healthy foods including fruit, vegetables, meat and proteins (nuts, dairy, grains). Choose foods high in fiber.

Limit intake of table sugars (it is no longer held that diabetics cannot have any sugar; rather, sugars must be moderated and factored into a healthy diet plan). Choose unsaturated fat found in nuts, nut butters, olive or canola oil and avocado.

Living with Diabetes

As living with diabetes becomes an accepted lifestyle choice, life for diabetes patients is close to normal as compared to those without the disease. Living with diabetes is a balancing act of sorts. Living with a balance exercise, medication, testing, and diet can be some how tiring, yet the result is well worth the effort. Diabetes complications can be prevented and lessened with good continuous blood sugar control, maintaining health of body systems with the collaboration of well trained medical professionals
