More employers are beginning to realize that their success and growth depend, more than ever, on teamwork, collaboration, diverse views, new and fresh perspectives, and creative innovation. As our population itself becomes more diverse, how well people get along with others, how well they encourage cooperation and friendly attitudes, are becoming leading criteria for making smart hiring and firing decisions.

Inclusion and diversity are now clearly key factors in helping your business prosper and grow. This actually represents a major and growing change in workplace values, priorities, human relations and hiring policies.


Forward looking policies include valuing a broad range of differing perspectives, opinions and attitudes, expanding the range of opportunities for individual responsibility, advancement and innovation, developing high-performing teams, and developing strategic business alliances with suppliers who share these values and aims.
Still others claim that merely valuing diversity and the legitimacy of differences is not enough. We must actually learn to rely on these differences if we expect to create the most effective teams. We need to assume and expect cooperation and communication of diverse ideas to result in a competitive advantage.

Now you know enough to begin developing increasing sensitivity to cross-cultural issues in the workplace. You're aware of differences in values, communication styles and aspirations. This is a solid beginning. To step beyond simple recognition of the issues involved in cultural diversity means actively developing a work environment that works for all employees. This is not a task to be taken up and then quickly and efficiently completed. This is a long-term shift toward managing people and processes that respects their diversity and includes as many of their mixed talents and strengths as possible, while alienating as few you can.

We all grew up in, and developed a sense of belonging to, a particular culture. Managers, employees, vendors, consultants, leaders and followers are all essential business resources that need to be managed effectively if our businesses are to thrive. The degree of diversity we now face in our businesses and in our cultures cannot be navigated successfully using a model based on us versus them. We must graduate to a more comprehensive view of the situation that includes everyone as inherently valuable resources to be guided, led, managed and brought together in a harmonious symphony of productive cooperation. We need to appreciate the ways in which other people's cultural standards and social values are as valid as our own in their world, so we can bring them into our own culture without destroying what is most unique and precious about what they bring to the mix. If we can learn to value their differences, we can learn to penetrate the markets they come from as well -- and thus use diversity as a powerful business asset.

Embracing a wider range of cultural norms requires us to shift our thinking about language, leadership, technological expectations, personal identity, social organization, workplace safety, face-saving, authority conception, nonverbal behavior, teamwork, the perception of time and who knows what else?

Most of us have spent the bulk of our work lives working in domestic settings where the dominant culture willfully set specifically narrow standards to which workers had to conform. The dominant culture has traditionally passed judgment and decided, for everyone choosing to work there, what was acceptable behavior and what was unacceptable behavior.

Cross-cultural differences have not typically been considered. Cross-cultural differences were irrelevant because you're working here now and this is how we do things here. If you don't like it, then you can leave. The norms of our dominant culture were only slightly bendable and never breakable without serious repercussions. Right and wrong never entered into it. "This is the way it is" was the battle cry of the dominant culture.

Major areas of cultural difference are foreign in one's own culture. It's only now that our global populations are becoming so intertwined and intermixed that we're having to consider these issues as vital to a productive workforce in the decades ahead. While we might consider speaking Portuguese in the United States as undesirable or even "wrong-headed", international business effectiveness demands the reevaluation of such provincial judgments. Every culture is natural and normal in its native context, and the context in which we're living, our "native context" is changing... Let's face it, the more Portuguese customers we sell to, the more hearing our employees speaking their language will sound like welcome music to our ears...

The workforce is changing and becoming more diverse. Travel and relocation among different cultures continues to make the whole world more of a "melting pot" where people from all over the globe come together and "mix"... The traditionally dominant culture in a society is becoming less dominant. This is largely a numbers game. The judgements of the formerly dominant culture are being brought into question more and more as they represent the living culture as a whole less and less.

Even in the United States we're seeing a much more diverse workforce (and college population) than ever before. These demographic changes in the workforce have reduced the size and influence of the historically dominant culture significantly. New minority cultures are gaining size and influence as they live and work side by side with "the rest of us".

Many countries are reaching greater levels of diversity than ever before in their histories. Their populations are increasingly diverse and multicultural in fact, even if not yet fully in perception. P And the new explosion of diversity in our cultures and our workplaces creates change on many levels. Now people have even more to resist than "change". They also resist losing the comfort and familiarity of living and working with people like themselves -- another reason to resist diversity. Some people feel they're losing something... something of their old identity, something they once took for granted.

Some people who felt comfort in being part of the dominant majority are losing that comfort and confidence as they find themselves becoming less dominant. Again, sometimes this is simply numbers. Many workers and managers in the U.S. have now been in business meetings where the majority of the people attending were obviously from other countries and other cultures. Their appearance and accents and style of dress and talking often make this obvious and, though unintentionally, "in your face".

Cultural and workplace diversity are forcing us to develop new ways of framing problems and setting workable norms, standards and expectations and, not surprisingly, lots of people find this threatening and scary. They feel less at home where they live, and need to think differently about what it means to part of a changing culture... and maybe even what it means to be a person.

Those with preexisting prejudices will likely have even more trouble adjusting to the increased diversity as they lose the "protection" of being part of the very obvious majority. In the past it was easier to keep their prejudices to themselves. Now they're surrounded by those they'd rather not be so involved with. They have compelling new reasons to come to terms with this and try to accept others in ways they never felt they had to before. This may ultimately be a good thing, but it's not going to be easy.

Cultural Diversity And Civil Rights

The United States has been a culture of immigrants from its inception. Beginning with the native American Indians, the way we've traditionally handled immigrants was by assimilating them into the dominant white Anglo-Saxon culture which was entrenched here early on. This assimilation process was never perfect, however, and each cultural group added a distinguishing contribution to the overall national culture. Over time the continual mixing of immigrant groups into the cultural soup changed the flavor of our cultural norms in subtle and sometimes striking ways. The phrase, the American "melting pot" pointed to this ongoing trend...

Yet with all this mixing and stirring, the majority of our major cultural elements were preserved. You needed to learn English quickly in order to survive. There were no accommodations made by the government for those who spoke other languages. Habits and practices from immigrant cultures that were small and only modestly distracting were permitted but the Anglo-Saxon norm was strongly enforced by convention, training, practice and authority. Other cultural norms, like any of those that might favor members of their own cultural group over others, were generally considered un-American and this made them just plain wrong.

Those groups who couldn't blend in smoothly because of unusual religious dress or practices (Hasidic Jews with their long beards and sidelocks for example) or physical appearance (such as the oriental's 'slanty eyes') were subject to special prejudices. Instead of expanding American norms to include these differences, those exhibiting these obvious differences were viewed as outcasts.

These norms were challenged during the civil rights movement of the 1960s to some effect. Yet long-ingrained prejudices don't vanish overnight because some new ideas suggest perhaps they should. Our insistence on forcing immigrants to abandon their ethnic and cultural distinctiveness was brought into question and some people started to doubt that a single homogenous culture was a supremely desirable end goal. This opened a crack in the door for minority groups to begin to affirm their unique heritage and identity. This trend strengthened as new generations of immigrants were born on U.S. soil with all the rights of other U.S. citizens. We started to view ourselves then as a more diverse or "pluralist" nation...

Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 made it explicitly illegal to discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, or religion. Gradually, equal opportunity for employment eased the entry of people from diverse cultural groups that were historically discriminated against, to enter the American work force. This strengthened their liberty and shored up their confidence that they needn't abandon all their ethnic cultural origins in order to survive. Blending in became more a of way to flavor the soup, rather than to disappear into it with as little flavor as possible.

The Changing Significance of Cultural Diversity

Native-born, non-Hispanic whites are no longer the dominant cultural ethnicity and other groups are not aspiring to become assimilated into its norms. Wow! That's big! Think about this for a minute and let it sink in. If this is true, and it should come as no great surprise, then what do we mean when we say "mainstream American culture"?

We can no longer accurately view the United States as a single uniform culture. We've become a culture of many cultures joined by a common set of laws and legal systems. The workplace may now unify us as a culture more than other influences by providing us common ground. Working at the same organization gives us a high-level task in common.

Even including Jewish, Italian, and other Americans with strong ethnic identities, only 15 percent of the incoming labor force can be described as white male. Surprised? This is a major change. Responsiveness to employee needs in today's diverse workforce requires understanding the cultural issues affecting people's worldviews, work performance, and expectations. Diverse cultural values and worldviews may help generate new, non-traditional solutions to long-standing problems.

Increased ethnic variety should also represent new domestic markets for goods or services, and possibly foreign markets as well. Many ethnic groups maintain ties with family "back home" and value family connections very highly. New opportunities in mature markets with little room for expansion in their traditional market share will also see growth.

Practicing domestic cross-cultural sensitivity, and getting better at it, also increases the chances that U.S. companies will have a leading edge in cross-cultural issues and markets abroad. Competitors from more homogeneous nations will have less insight into foreign ethnic values, worldviews and markets.

Diversity and International Business

Diversity is also growing rapidly in other countries, like Britain and Thailand, for example. We need to stop treating other nations as if they have a single homogenous culture. All Brits or all Thais are not culturally alike. This presents new challenges for international business management.

Britain has large cultural groups whose roots come from its former colonies in Asia, the Caribbean, and Africa. The United Kingdom itself combines four separate countries with their own cultural heritage: the English, the Irish, the Welsh, and the Scots.

Managing diversity goes a lot deeper than matching the percentages of a given population to the percentage of employees in the workplace. In the United States, lawsuits have sometimes defined issues of discrimination in terms of the "disparate impact" certain "discriminatory" policies have on a company's overall employment percentages by race or ethnic group. Plus, in the United States, racial and ethnic groups are not bound to one specific part of the country over another. It's very common for even "close families" to be spread out all over the country. Many workers move to where their jobs or careers take them and have been doing this to a significant degree for generations. Managers whose sole experience rests with employees living in a highly mobile culture, may assume they can readily hire employees from elsewhere in the country and they will not object too strongly to moving to wherever they need to in order to get the job.

Many countries, however, have ethnic or cultural groups with strong attachments to specific regions. For example, Belgium has officially delineated which regions of the nation are French, German, Flemish, or bilingual. Some mobility is acceptable to Belgians, but not nearly as much as you could expect in the U.S. If you need to employ a balance of French and Flemish Belgians, this may well require that you open separate facilities in both regions of the country. Now there's an additional business expense it might be very hard to see coming...

There are a few more distinctions worth looking at quickly to help get your mind in the proper gear for anticipating the types of problems you may encounter when dealing with issues of cultural and workplace diversity abroad.

In the United States, we tend to encourage increased diversity by constructing equal opportunity employment laws. These may have some broadly specific guidelines, but are not typically riddled with officially mandated quotas and hiring requirements based on race or ethnic group. Malaysia, in contrast, does demand strict hiring quotas according to ethnic group in many business situations.

American managers visiting Malaysia may find these hiring restrictions cumbersome and intrusive, yet the Malaysian system has worked well for Malaysia's Malay, Tamil, and Chinese communities for decades. One could even argue that the inter-ethnic peace that has lasted through the Malaysian economic crises in the late 1990s has directly benefited from these laws. Considering that Malaysia has traditionally scapegoated its Chinese community during periods of economic upheaval in the past, this is an example of cultural diversity that demands our respect and acceptance -- admittedly a new and unaccustomed practice for leading American managers.

To sum up, our experience at home handling cultural diversity in the workplace can serve as a sharp edge in expanding international business and human relations. As a case in point, Japanese culture is still 98.5 percent Japanese in its ethnic background. Therefore, the Japanese will have a much harder time appreciating the importance of, and the business issues involved in, respecting diversity as an important issue when dealing with other countries. Canada, in contrast, has no single cultural or ethnic group large enough to comprise a majority of its population. They don't really have a single traditional culture dominating the nation as a whole. They will have no trouble understanding the importance of diversity when dealing with other countries in business contexts.

Hopefully, you've now become more aware of the important issues hiding behind the seemingly friendly and innocuous phrase "diversity". The issues involved affect us as citizens, as colleagues and co-workers, as managers, and as companies expanding our reach both internally and externally. Internally we can strengthen our companies by hiring a more diverse workforce and learning to manage it effectively. Externally, we can raise our awareness of these issues to improve our business relations with other countries. And as individuals, we can see the need to leave some of our traditional prejudices, fears and small-minded worldviews behind, because they are no longer serving us well, even in the short run.

