The Playstation 2 is the successor to the Sony PlayStation console. The PlayStation 2 was first released in Japan on 4th March 2000. Next it was launched in the United States on 26th October 2000. The European release followed on 24th November 200 and the Australian release date was 30th November 2000. The console was immediately popular, due in a great part to the popularity of the precursor, the PlayStation. The console was regarded as 'cool' and more fitting for teens and adults than the rival Nintendo console that was considered to me more childish. The PlayStation 2 had a stylish minimalist design which appealed to the tastes of that era.


A huge array of games were available for the PlayStation 2, some that were very easy to pick up and play such as Singstar, some that gave the player the freedom to do things that would be illegal in real life, such as stealing cars in the Grand Theft Auto series. The console was also backward compatible meaning that those with a library of PlayStation games would be able to continue to play them on their PlayStation 2. The games were also easily pirated which also encouraged more people to purchase the console. More PlayStation 2s were sold than any other console of its generation. 630,552 consoles were sold during the first weekend it went on sale in Japan.
The console has a 128 bit "Emotion Engine" CPU clocked at 294 MHz in the first versions, and 299 MHz in later versions. There is 32 MB of RDRAM. It is capable of displaying 75 million polygons per second through the "Graphics Synthesizer" clocked at 150 MHz. However these figures assume ideal circumstances and these figures have been criticized for being unrealistic and do not reflect real-world performance. The true polygons per second figure with full textures and effects is more like 13 million.
The console has two controller ports, and two slots for memory cards. There is an e xpansion bay, a port for a network adaptor, Hard Drive and m odem an Infrared remote control port and 2 USB 1.1 ports.


In 2006 Sony Computer Entertainment Europe got twenty BAFTA nominations and won five trophies at the ceremony in London.