There are many plants that fall under the category vines. Most are easy to grow and require little care; however, a basic knowledge of their cultural needs is important for success in your garden.
Vines are among the most versatile plants in the landscape. Most people associate vines with arbors or trellises, but they can also be used to screen unsightly views, to provide privacy on patios, to lend character to a stone, brick or stucco wall, to break up the monotony of a long chain link fence, to accent or soften the architectural details of a building, or as a ground cover where turfgrass is either undesirable or will not grow.
Landscape architects sometime use vines on trees to provide a new dimension to the tree canopy. An oak tree bearing bright-orange flowers of Cross Vine, for instance, is sure to create a conversation piece in the landscape. Some vines, like Bougainvillea or Allamanda, are excellent for use in patio pots or hanging baskets. Moonvine adds a wonderful fragrance with an evening bloom. Honeysuckle and Trumpet Creeper are prized for their flowers, while other vines, like Five-leaf Akebia, Climbing Fig and Ivy, are grown for their foliage. Wisteria is sometimes trained as a single-standing specimen or small tree in the landscape.
If you're unfamiliar with the USDA Plant Hardiness Zone system, find out your zone from a local nursery. While you should take the USDA zone recommendations seriously, remember that location, like politics, is local. Within each USDA zone there are always microclimates that are warmer than the surrounding, larger region. But don't forget that a microclimate, especially one that is shady or exposed to wind, can also be colder than the encircling area.
Some of the most spectacular vines, such as bougainvillea and passion flower, are also tender-unable to tolerate cold temperatures. Because of their height, even hardy vines can't take full advantage of snow cover, as perennial flowers can.
Four Seasons of Vine Work
Spring Prune vines that flower on this year's growth; remove any damaged or dead stems from all vines. Sow seeds of annual vines. Plant perennial vines in cold regions. Mulch and feed vines. Tie and train vines as needed. Take stem cuttings and/or layer stems. Summer Prune vines that flower on old growth. Tie and train vines as needed. Make sure plants receive adequate water. Take stem cuttings and/or layer stems. Fall Take stem cuttings and/or layer stems. Collect seeds. Plant perennial vines in warm regions. Clean up area around base of vines. Mulch vines for winter protection. Winter Sow seeds of perennial and woody vines. Check that vines are secured to their supports. Prune hardiest vines that flower on new growth. Selecting Vines
When selecting vines, there are a number of factors to consider, including their intended use, location in the landscape (ie., sun vs. shade), soil adaptability, type of support needed and color of bloom or foliage characteristics. In addition, you also need to consider the maintenance requirement. Will the vine need constant pruning to keep it within bounds? Certain fast-growing vines, such as wisteria and common honeysuckle, require a great deal of routine pruning. If allowed to spread without restraint, their profuse growth can cover trees and shrubs, reducing light and aeration within the canopy. Kudzu is an excellent example of this. Some vines can even injure or kill small trees by wrapping around them and cutting off nutrient flow. Other vines, like Autumn Flowering Clematis, will disperse its seeds after flowering and may pop up in areas where they are not wanted.
Another important consideration is the amount of training a vine requires. Some vines cling and climb naturally while others must be trained to follow the supporting wire, pole or other structure. Therefore, the type of structure on which you intend to grow vines will influence the type of vine you choose.
Annual vines are very popular, such as Moonvine (Ipomoea alba), Black-eyed Susan Vine (Thunbergia alata), Sweet Pea (Lathyrus odorata), Purple Hyacinth Bean (Doliches lablab) and Morning Glory (Ipomoea spp.). Annual vines are grown from seed each year. Perennial vines persist from year to year. Foliage may die back in winter and re-sprout in spring.
Perennial vine favorites include Trumpetcreeper (Campsis spp.), Carolina Yellow Jessamine (Gelsemium sempervirens) and Clematis (Clematis hybrida). See the table at the end of this publication for a listing of favorite vines and their characteristics.
Most vines, except those grown as groundcovers or in pots, require some type of support to grow. Climbing vines can be separated into three basic types: clinging, twining and winding.
Clinging vines grasp onto a rough surface by means of rootlets or adhesive disks. Climbing Fig (Ficus pumila), Confederate Jasmine (Trachelospermum jasminoides), Virginia Creeper (Pathenocissus quinquefolia) and Trumpet Creeper (Campsis radicans) are examples of clingers. These types of vines are often used to cover solid surfaces, such as walls and fences. However, clinging vines may loosen mortar between bricks over time and are difficult to remove once they become anchored. Their methods of climbing also can damage wood by clinging too closely, preventing good air circulation and promoting wood decay. Therefore, clinging vines are best suited for trellises or arbors away from solid surfaces.
Twining vines climb by encircling upright supports, such as poles, wires and lattice. These vines require mechanical training to follow a support. Examples are Mandevilla (Mandevilla splendens), Wisteria (Wisteria sinensis), Carolina Jessamine (Gelsemium sempervirens) and Morning Glory (Ipomoea spp.)
Winding vines climb by means of tendrils; slim, flexible, leafless stems that wrap around anything they contact. One of the best known examples of this type of vine is the Muscadine Grape. Ornamental vines that fall into this category include Maypop (Passiflora spp.), Trumpet Honeysuckle (Lonicera sempervirens), Clematis (Clematis hybrida) and Cross Vine (Bignonia capreolata).
Location in the Landscape Most flowering vines require at least one-half day of sun to be vigorous and bloom abundantly. Other vines, like variegated English ivy, will develop more vivid leaf patterns when provided a few hours of morning sun.
Vine Supports Twining and winding-type vines are supported best on wires, lattice, trellises and arbors. They need some type of support to help them along when grown on a flat surface.
It is recommended that vine supports be constructed from sturdy, durable materials. Always use treated lumber for outdoor structures. Redwood, cedar and cypress are particularly durable in the outdoor environment. A wood preservative/water seal applied after construction will also help prolong the life of the structure. Wrought iron also makes an excellent support. Use aluminum or copper wire to attach plants because it is resistant to rusting.
Planting Vines When to plant vines depends on where you live, what species of vine you've chosen, and whether your plant is container grown, bare-root, balled-and-burlapped (B&B), a small, tender transplant, or if you're beginning with seeds. The goal is to make sure that a good root system develops before the vine is stressed-by low temperatures in the North, or by high ones in the South. Bare-root vines should be planted at the same time as perennial flowers, shrubs, and trees-typically in spring in cold regions, or in autumn in warmer climates. Container-grown climbers can be planted any time, as long as you water them regularly (and provide shade, if necessary).
Dig a hole that is at least twice as wide as the root ball, but only one or two inches deeper. Gently remove a container plant from its pot (once out of the container, handle the vine by the root ball), untangle any girdled roots, and place it in the hole. It should sit at the same level or very slightly higher than it was growing in the container (an exception is clematis). Water the root ball generously, allow the water to drain, and then fill the hole with the soil you removed, tamping it firmly around the root ball. Cut back the plant to encourage branching, and finish the job by mulching with 1 or 2 inches of compost or other organic matter.
Handle B&B vines the same way. The traditional advice is to leave the burlap in place-removing any wires, cords, or other ties-but there is some evidence that roots develop more quickly if the cover is removed. Moreover, today's burlap may contain plastic threads, which will prevent the vine's roots from expanding. If removing the burlap is difficult, consider loosening it or slicing it several times with a knife after the root ball is in place.
Hardy bareroot vines should be planted as early in spring as the ground can be worked. Cut away any dead or broken roots, then soak the roots in water for 8 hours. Leave several inches of loosened soil in the bottom of the planting hole. Set the vine at the same level it was growing (the stem will be discolored, giving you a guideline), refill the hole with the soil you removed, and mulch.
An economical way to plant a large number of vines as a groundcover is by purchasing and planting rooted cuttings or "liner" plants. Ask your local nurseryman about the availability of liners.
Fertilization
If you plant during fall and winter, wait until spring to fertilize. If you plant in the spring and summer, wait four to six weeks for the plants to get established before fertilizing. Then apply a light sprinkling (about a tablespoon) of a complete balanced fertilizer, such as 8-8-8 or 10-10-10 around the perimeter of the planting hole and water it in. Once the vines are established, fertilize in early spring and mid-summer with a complete fertilizer, such as 6-12-12 or 5-10-10 at a rate of 11/2 lb. per 100 sq. ft. A soil sample taken to your local county extension office for analysis can help you determine your soils precise nutritional needs.
Pruning
Each vine is different, making them require different pruning from each other too. Generally pruning is done to remove dead, diseased and damaged wood, to reduce size and to promote branching. Vigorous vines, such as Honeysuckle, Trumpet Vine and Wisteria may require regular pruning to keep them confined to the support.
Usually, flowering vines should be pruned after they bloom. This is particularly true for vines like wisteria and spring-flowering clematis that bloom on previous season's growth. Pruning these vines before they bloom will reduce flowering.
The amount of pruning depends on how well and active the vine grows and the amount of foliage you desire. Some vines will form layer upon layer of growth unless they are thinned out regularly. Wisteria, for instance, requires annual pruning to reduce the amount of vegetative growth. Removing approximately 1/3 of the canopy of wisteria each year will encourage the production of short spurs on the remaining branches which will bear next season's flowers.
Location is an important part of vertically gardening. Make sure you place garden arbors and other structures where they won shade out other plants. Youl also want to ensure that the plants you grow on your trellises or garden arbors will get enough sunlight. Orient the structure accordingly. Moreover, if you have seasonal winds, you may want to locate your arbor or trellis in a safe place where your plants are less likely to blow off.
If you have vines growing in your garden, youl need to keep the base of the plant mulched with about four inches of organic mulch. This will ensure that your soil retains water during the warmer weeks of the summer. The mulch will also add nutrients to the soil. Some vines and other vertically-growing plants dry out quickly, so make sure and water them frequently.
When you grow plants vertically, youl want to keep constant tabs on them so they don grow where you don want them to go. Some vines can quickly attach themselves to rain gutters and pull them away from the wall if youe not careful! Also, when planning your vertical garden, make sure you think about access for maintenance. Will you need a ladder to prune your vines, or can you reach them easily?
As your plants grow up your trellis, wall, or garden arbor, you may need to keep them fastened to the structure and train them so they won slump off or fall. Some vines will attach more readily to a surface and wind in and out of a trellis or arbor, but others need a helping hand now and then. Twine is a good choice for tying your plants, and won damage the stems. You can typically find weatherproof garden twine at your local garden supply store.
Equipment for Vertical Gardening If you don't have many walls or fences in your home to grow your plants, your best bet is to look into buying a trellis or a garden arbor.
These outdoor structures are perfect for growing flowering vines, climbing roses, and even some climbing vegetables, such as peas.
Garden Arbors
Arbors are typically made from vinyl, iron or other metals, or wood. Arbors can even have a small bench or swing built into the structure, making them ideal for relaxing.
The addition of a vine growing up and over your arbor will make it a cool and shady spot. Garden arbors come in a wide variety of styles. You can purchase arbors with flat roofs, arched roofs, or gabled roofs. Some garden arbors even come with gates or planters, making them functional pieces of art.
Trellises
Trellises are leaning or stand alone structures that will work for a variety of plants. Both flowering vines and some vegetables work well when grown on trellises. Trellises are also useful for creating privacy barriers and allswhere none exist in your yard.
The fragrant Confederate jasmine is a hardy vine that can serve as a climber or ground cover. It blooms open from May to June.
