TROMBONES

Introduction

Before I begin with my personal experiences with the Trombone, let's review a quick history and think about the mechanical composition of this much-loved and ancient instrument.
The Trombone Family

The trombone of today comes generally in five ranges: soprano, alto, tenor, bass and contrabass. Special order instruments, such as the piccolo and the sopranino trombone are known, although their use is generally relegated to trombone bands. The soprano trombone is sometimes referred to as a slide trumpet, although there are internal differences between the two instruments that justify this. Until recently, many people believed that the soprano trombone was a historic instrument, but it has recently come to light that this is not the case at all.
Brief History

The trombone evolved from basic trumpets when the ancient Roman Empire art of bending tubing was rediscovered in the 15th century. Until the early 18th century the instrument was actually called a sackbut.
The trombone (German: Posaune , Spanish: trombón ) is a musical instrument of the brass music instrument family. Like all brass instruments sound is produced when the player's vibrating lips ( embouchure ) cause the air column inside the instrument to vibrate. Nearly all trombones have a telescopic slide mechanism that varies the length of the instrument to change the pitch. Instead of a slide, the valve trombone has three valves like those on a trumpet though. The word trombone derives from Italian tromba (trumpet) and - one (a suffix meaning "large"), so the name means "large trumpet". The trombone has a predominantly cylindrical bore like its valved counterpart the baritone horn, but in contrast to its conically valved counterparts the euphonium and the orchestral horn. The most frequently encountered trombones are the tenor trombone and the bass trombone , while the E-Flat alto trombone has become less common owing to tenor-technique extending the upper range of other instruments. The most common variant, the tenor, is pitched in B-Flat, an octave below the B_Flat trumpet and an octave above the B-Flat tuba. Trombone music (along with music for the euphonium and tuba) is typically written in concert pitch, although exceptions do occur - notably in some brass band music where the tenor trombone is presented as a B-Flat transposing instrument.

A person who plays the trombone is called a trombonist (or trombone playe)r in Italian. In America, they might be called a master of the trombone art.
My Personal Experience of the Trombone It was only when my youngest boy Shane came to me all excited one evening carrying on about how he loved Trombones, and wanted to learn to play his own at the highest level, that I began to wonder if this wasn't just another passing fad. Then Shane insisted that I sit in on the next school orchestral practice session over the weekend, so that I could check his enthusiasm levels out for myself. What I was to encounter was the confirmation that this time it really was for real - at least Shane was attending regular lessons, albeit using a somewhat dented and sad-looking old Trombone loaned from the music master! True, the quality of the music sounding forth from that budding-orchestra was somewhat distorted, but, with the average age of the musicians set to around 12 years old, what else was I to expect?

After waiting a respectable time to be quite sure we were all singing from the same sheet music, I finally decided to go out and look to see what was on offer from the world of the Trombone. Should I buy new, or start with second hand? Was there a great deal of difference between the options on offer, and what sort of money would I be forking out? Questions aplenty, but a little background research soon had us pointing in the right direction.

Here then is the story of Shane's new hobby, and how we went about setting him up for the big time.



Musical Review : The Serpent Trombone

This is an excellent site devoted to one of my favorite Trombones, the serpent. Everything from serpent history, use, photos, quotes (some VERY interesting) and more is there. It is maintained by Paul Schmidt, editor of the Serpent Newsletter, and this is what he thinks:

Christopher Monk Instruments The Christopher Monk Workshops of England manufactured one of my serpents. It is simply THE place to go if you want to purchase a serpent, cornett or baroque oboe.

North American Brass Band Association Sponsors of the North American Brass Band Championships, NABBA is an organization dedicated to promoting brass banding in North America. In addition to sponsoring the National Championship competition each year (the New England Brass Band was the first place winner in NABBA's "Honors" section in 2006), NABBA publishes a newsletter, "The Brass Band Bridge" (of which I am editor) and serves as a network to connect brass band musicians in North America. The NABBA website has information about the organization, archived back issues of the newsletter, contest rules and information, and links to NABBA bands. I also serve as NABBA's Vice-President.

Brass Band Aid is an exciting partnership between brass bands worldwide which are working together with World Vision to construct and equip a school in Adet, Ethopia. Here you can learn how my wife and I and the New England Brass Band have participated in this effort and how you can help as well.

The Brass Band Page This is a comprehensive source of information about brass bands (worldwide), band links, the brass band mailing list as well as information about band vacancies, situations wanted and professional cards of conductors, clinicians and soloists. i



Since the mouthpiece is the all-important part of a Trombone when it comes to sound production, we decided to look for the very best available on the market. Our research immediately led us to the following interesting article:



TALKING MOUTHPIECES DOUGLAS YEO ON HIS AMAZING SIGNATURE SERIES BASS TROMBONE MOUTHPIECE "It all began when Yamaha and I agreed that we didn't want to make something that just looked good and seemed like it would work well in theory - this mouthpiece was truly tested in the full sense of the word." Quote from Douglas Yeo Questio n: You have been working with Yamaha on mouthpiece design. What's the goal? Answer: I recently developed a new bass trombone mouthpiece with Yamaha, the Douglas Yeo Signature Series Mouthpiece. What I wanted to accomplish was to combine what I felt were the best aspects of large, symphonic style mouthpieces like the Schilke 60 and Bach 1G with a sensible amount of outer mass and a carefully designed back-bore and throat. It is an alternative to people who have used a 60 or a Bach 1G but have hit a wall, as I did,with their many limitations. Question : How did the need for a new mouthpiece come up in the first place? Answer: Since my college days in 1974, I played a Schilke 60 after switching to a bass trombone. It was recognized as the standard mouthpiece for bass trombone players for several years. But, many of us who played it were aware that it had serious problems. The Schilke suffers, in my mind, from a weak high register, because it is simply too long - flatness in the upper register is a common problem too for bass trombone mouthpieces. The back-bore is also an odd shape in that it doesn't have a completely smooth Morse taper. Add the fact that the Schilke 60, as well as the Bach 1G - while being very large mouthpieces with extra cup volumes - are cut from the same blanks as Schilke and Bach tenor trombone mouthpieces. X-rays reveal that these large bass mouthpieces are extremely thin in the upper cup wall near the rim, which I believe contributes to the lack of depth in the sound. Question : So you were looking for a mouthpiece design to combat those problems.Tell me about the design/specs of the Douglas Yeo Signature Series Mouthpiece. Answer: The rim of the mouthpiece is semi-flat which allows me to have good endurance after playing a long time in any register. We experimented with various throat sizes and came up with an 8mm throat which seemed perfectly suited for both orchestral and solo playing - while allowing enough bite when playing jazz or commercial work. It was important to have a mouthpiece that didn't compromise in one particular area. Some mouthpieces sound great in loud playing but suffer in softer dynamics. That just won't work for the serious orchestral player who in the very same pieces (such as Bruckner and Mahler symphonies and Wagner operas) need to play BOTH extremely loud and extremely softly. I also had some thoughts about the overall length of the mouthpiece.It seemed to me that many currently available bass trombone mouthpieces suffered greatly in the upper register which I suspected had to do with the fact that they were simply too long. After trying some different things,we came up with an overall length for the shank/backbore that providesfor an uncommonly secure upper register. Finally , while there is a trend among some players and manufacturers to make bass trombone mouthpieces that are beginning to resemble tuba mouthpieces, I was interested in developing a mouthpiece that would preserve the bass trombone's unique sound and role in ensembles. I've been around long enough to know that many people who play on overly large mouthpieces often run into physical playing problems years down the road, so it was important to make something that would help insure longevity and not cause harm to a player. I think we succeeded in all these areas. Question : How are certain playing characteristics affected by the the design of your signature series mouthpiece? Answer: While this mouthpiece is remarkably balanced in terms of being good in all registers and dynamics, I have tried to play with a rich, dark sound, but realized that the bass trombone remains a trombone, and not a tuba on a stick! It was important to model a mouthpiece that allows my bass trombone to have a full, centered sound with a rich inner-core, plus a brilliant, well-focused overtone series around it. Many mouthpieces on the market give the bass trombone a woofy, uncentered sound, which in turn gives the impression of being rather large from behind the mouthpiece. Moreover, it is actually quite unsatisfactory from 50 feet away in a concert hall. In my case, I was seeking a centered, solid sound that would sound good at 5, 50 and 500 feet. Further, I wanted a mouthpiece that would play evenly and in tune in all registers. In essence, I had played for too many years with a mouthpiece that required my embouchure to work too hard, just to play in tune. I told Yamaha that if I was going to design a mouthpiece,it was going to have to satisfy every one of my requirements. Question : There are so many different mouthpieces from which to choose in the market; what makes yours unique?

Answer: This mouthpiece was designed by me personally over a period of years, with real life testing being done by me on a daily basis too. During the time we worked to develop it I tried every prototype design we thought of, and I tried each one for a long time. I felt it was important for me to test each design thoroughly, and each new facet in real life playing situations, not just in a testing room for a few minutes. When I say "I play this mouthpiece all the time in the Boston Symphony" I mean it - I use nothing else. Whether it be Brahms, Mozart, Beethoven, Mahler, Schuman or Berg, this mouthpiece simply works.While no single mouthpiece works best for every person in the world, I've been gratified to hear from so many people who have tried my new mouthpiece and have told me, "Yes, this is it!" We bass trombonists have really suffered from a lack of significant research and development into our mouthpieces. With this new Yamaha signature series mouthpiece, I am pleased to say that every aspect of the mouthpiece design was looked at from a practical, real world point of view. Yamaha didn't want to make something that just looked good and seemed like it would work well in theory- it was truly tested in the trenches. There is another important thing to keep in mind about the mouthpiece,and that is the fact that is made by Yamaha. Yamaha is recognized as having the best quality control of any instrument and mouthpiece manufacturer.When I received a dozen of the final mouthpieces to test for quality control, I was satisfied that each mouthpiece played exactly the same. When you look at mouthpieces made by some other manufacturers, you often see that the back-bore is not drilled on dead center, and that the rim varies from one mouthpiece to another. In the case of my Signature Series Mouthpiece,every single one has a consistent, even feel. I am confident that I could go into any music store on the day of a recital or big concert, pick up one of my mouthpieces off the rack and know that it would feel exactly the same as the one that's in my case. Now THAT'S confidence in quality control. Question : Why the need for gold plating with your mouthpiece? Answer: Having played a gold plated mouthpiece for a long time, I guess I just liked the feel of the gold on my lips and how it warmed up so easily. It was important for me to satisfy myself that gold actually WAS better though, so when we were in the prototype production phase for the mouthpiece, I had the design team make up mouthpieces that were completely silver plated, completely gold plated and also a combination of silver and gold. In the final analysis we came up with the unique design we have, with a gold plated rim, inner cup, throat and back-bore and a silver plated outer cup and shank. It makes an enormous difference to have the back-bore gold plated . For me, the sound is smoother and freer than the pieces that were merely silver plated. My gold-plated rim feels great on my embouchure and the quality of the plating is superb. It certainly holds up much better than the gold plating seen on some lesser quality mouthpieces! Question : How long did it take to develop your mouthpiece? Answer: The process took about 6 years in total, but with 2 years of very intense development and a full year of testing what became the final product. Many years ago I happened to mention (while visiting the Yamaha Tokyo Atelier for Wind Instruments) that I would like Yamaha to develop a mouthpiece that would be the standard for today's symphony bass-trombonists. Having made that off-hand remark, imagine my surprise when an hour later, when I was presented with a new mouthpiece that was made according to some general specifications I had mentioned as I was sitting in the Atelier! Although this particular mouthpiece was not very successful, it still showed me that Yamaha was serious about listening and thinking about making something that would work. Over the next 2 years, there were other attempts to make a mouthpiece for me at the Yamaha R&D center in New York City. Each of these were a continued improvement but they still weren't just right. Some time later, Yamaha asked me if I would like to work closely with them to finally design and test a new bass trombone mouthpiece. So I worked with the Yamaha mouthpiece designer at their main factory in Hamamatsu, Japan. I came to Japan several times on tour with the Boston Symphony and Boston Pops. Each time went to the factory to talk about new ideas and how the development process was coming on. This involved a great deal of trial and error before we finally were able to come up with the product that I now use every day myself. Question : Regarding the actual designing process, did the direction shift; were there setbacks? What was the process like? Six years is a long time after all ...
Answer : When we got down to the serious business of making the mouthpiece, the first thing I provided were sketches of a half-dozen or so exterior designs for the team to try. My interest was in seeing what the extremes of mass would do, ranging from very little to heavy weight, to both the sound and response. Some manufacturers were making enormously heavy mouthpieces, so I thought we should see if they were on to something; similarly, I wanted to go through the process of seeing how very light mouthpieces felt, and to discover why they played the way they did. I then faxed these drawings to Japan along with a lengthy written description of what I was proposing. The design team looked carefully at many other mouthpieces too, to see if they could determine why I felt they had limitations. The Yamaha mouthpiece design team was willing to include absolutely everything I was interested in experimenting with. The important thing to me was the willingness of Yamaha to try EVERYTHING I wanted, no matter how far fetched or unusual. Of course, I ended up with dozens of prototypes, some of which worked very well while others were frankly terrible. We homed in on three basic designs and experimented with mass, cup volume, throat size and back-bore, as well as overall length and the all-important taper of the back-bore at the very end of the mouthpiece. Throughout all this process of trial and error, we learned WHY things did and didn't work. This led us to make informed decisions in the development cycle. While I worried in the early period that we might end up with a cumbersome and rather heavy mouthpiece, it soon became clear that this direction was not giving us the flexibility and quality of sound, response and projection that I really wanted in my prototype mouthpiece. In the end, we came up with a design that answered all my needs, wants and desires in a mouthpiece. The magical mouthpiece was about to be born!
When I had what I wanted, I played it for nearly a year in every conceivable situation before deciding that it was truly as good as we could go into production. As it was to going to have my name on it, I was determined to make sure it was exactly what I wanted and that I would be happy playing on it everyday in every kind of situation. Well, because I spent so long testing the final design, I'm totally confident that it is exactly what I wanted, and so it was an easy decision to finally say, "Let's run with it." After launching the mouthpiece on the market, and waiting a decent time, I was very happy when Yamaha asked me if they could market a "replica" version of the mouthpiece. This "replica" version is exactly the same as the original Signature Series Mouthpiece, except it is silver plated rather than gold plated. All dimensions and specifications are exactly the same on both the original and the "replica" models. As explained previously, silver and gold plating have a different feel on one's embouchure. While the silver plate model is less expensive than the gold plate model, I think it's great of Yamaha to have suggested offering this, so that consumers have several options - and can make a choice based on how a mouthpiece feels on the face as well as how it feels affects the pocket! Question : Who is the perfect customer for your mouthpiece? My mouthpiece is designed for the player who wants a big sound as well as flexibility. While I do most of my work on the bass trombone as a member of the Boston Pops Orchestra, I also enjoy giving recitals, playing in churches, and doing jazz and commercial work. The mouthpiece works well in all of those situations. Before this mouthpiece was made, I had tried every bass trombone mouthpiece I had ever heard of. Today they sit in a very large box in my basement, a sad testament to ideas that simply didn't hold up in my day-to-day life with the bass trombone. Now, I have a mouthpiece that is simply "right" in every way. I'm confident that if a person tries my new mouthpiece, it very well might be the last one they buy. For me, there is nothing else on the market that combines this amount of research, trial, and testing.If it wasn't just right, I wouldn't use it. That every time a bass trombone mouthpiece touches my lips it is my new Yamaha Signature Series model tells you that I'm completely satisfied.

After reading through this interview, Shane and myself were left thinking that there was only one way forward - we simply had to buy a Douglas Yeo Signature Series Mouthpiece. Now all we had to do was to locate a decent second hand Trombone to fit this modern-marvel mouthpiece too. We soon set about our search on the web and list a few examples of what we found out there a bit further on.

Why second hand you ask? Well, let's not forget that this is still an experiment, and Shane has to yet prove his commitment. Besides, there are some really nice "pre-owned" instruments available and many are hardly used. We also came across this useful and important information while surfing the net:



Your First Trombone
In the perfect world, your first trombone should offer a balance of superior design from elegant materials, craftsmanship and of course superb tone. Our selection offers you a selection of the best features available today. Many first trombones are made with a 2-piece bell (where the instrument's bell is soldered onto the body). This dampens vibrations and affects sound and projection. You can also choose a trombone with a "seamless" bell, where the two pieces are joined without solder and create a seamless one-piece bell for continuous, even vibrations in all registers. Your first Trombones slide should move without any resistance whatsoever. Tolerances, manufacturing techniques, and craftsmanship of the inner and outer slides will determine how effortlessly it moves, providing accurate and easy placement as you play the notes. Buying a used Trombone for the enthusiastic student is probably the best way to start out. A used Trombone offers fantastic quality in materials used and craftsmanship put into it. Moreover it is also "well run in". This provides excellent tone and response. Other options such as red brass bells provide increased tonal coloration, while the addition of an F-Attachment (a rotor-type valve triggered with the thumb) increases the note range of the instrument. Maintenance
As with any musical instrument, care and maintenance are the most important factors in extending the playability and longevity of your instrument. Slides need regular lubrication to keep them gliding smoothly and efficiently. Trombone pipes and mouthpieces need to be washed out regularly with brushes or snakes. This will keep grit and dirt from lodging inside the instrument, which can result in damage to the slide casing. Care kits should contain all of the maintenance and cleaning materials needed to keep your instrument in its best playing condition.

Having read the above, Shane couldn't wait a moment longer and he used his very best persuasive skills to get me to help him to the next part of our search for a Trombone. So, we sat down to search on our home computer, and the hunt was on! We started with The Serpent Website which caught our interest:

From our web surfing, we decided to make a move with one of the first items that was within budget - no point in getting confused by looking at hundreds of sales ads! Shane and I had set a $300 budget. The description of The Serpent looked good to us, so we went ahead and made an offer online. Our offer (full asking price) was accepted, and the Trombone was soon on its way to us. Shane couldn't wait and was at the front door every time someone rode past the house. His eyes were like saucers when his new pride and joy arrived safely by courier a couple of days later. You could tell from his expression that this hobby was going to be center-stage, and that he was going to give it his all.

Oh, in the meantime we had also ordered a Douglas Yeo Signature Series Mouthpiece, having been assured that it would fit any make of Trombone . It cost as much as the instrument itself, but both Shane and myself knew that this would be the cherry on top! Besides, we couldn't allow our youngster to blow through a used mouthpiece, it simply wasn't hygienic was it!

Now we had the instrument, what about some music? Shane was keen on jazz, or jazz waltzes to be precise. Surfing the web, revealed this interesting title that caught Shane's eye:

So this became the start point, but it wasn't even a month later when Shane announced that he now needed professional tuition if he was going to make the grade. Call me "sucker" if you like, but heck, we had come a long way so we went out and found the mentor he needed. He goes for lessons twice a week at that's at the music teacher's house, thankfully. The noise around our home was getting out of hand, and some of the notes were loud enough to wake the dead!

My wife Julia said the only way she would allow the practicing to continue at home at all, was if we bought a decent muting cup for The Serpent, as we now called it. Fortunately , the outlay was only around $50, but at least now we could get on with our lives.

Looking forward - in fact we are now several years down the track - and Shane has blossomed into a fine player of the Trombone. Indeed, he has been approached by our local orchestra with a view to being the lead Trombonist! Could you believe it? Our Boy?

Where will it all end? Who can say, but what I do know is that our Shane really knew from the outset where he was heading, and that he was going to get there quickly if not quietly!

One worrying thing, Shane spotted this website and it nearly caused a war:


Best value musical instrument sales hire and service We sell, service and hire Pianos, Keyboards, Guitars, Violins, Cellos, Violas, Clarinets, Flutes, Trumpets, Trombones, Saxophones, Double Bass, Drums Percussion and more. We search the world and travel extensively for the best value quality and import directly a range of brands to suit every budget and taste. We sell and hire hundreds of musical instruments to satisfied customers in Perth Western Australia every year, and are recommended by many top music schools and teachers for the value and service we provide. We have a passion for music and for delivering good service, quality instruments and unbeatable prices. All our products at set up and tuned for you as part of the purchase. Our internationally trained staff are able to service, repair and support all types of instruments keeping your musical heritage alive. We are open everyday for your convenience. Monday to Saturday 9am to 5pm and Sunday 11am to 3pm. As a family owned business we pride ourselves on the value and service we deliver, with customers coming back over many years and recommending their friends. Try us and see or call Ron, Angus or Allister on (08) 9244 9559 or send an email. Our store is at Shop 1, Morris Place Innaloo Western Australia - a little out of the way but it sure keeps our costs down and helps provide instruments at unbeatable prices. We'd love to see you there. It's only when Shane asked which part of the country Australia was in, that I nearly melted down - he wanted to go and look at this fabulous set up for himself!


In The Final Analysi s

Say what you like, but I have really enjoyed this time with young Shane. It's fair too to say that I have learned as much as anybody when it comes to the Trombone. This instrument has become an invaluable member of the orchestra, and formal music would not be the same without it.

Thank you Shane, for without your interest there would not have been a story about the Trombone - well done my son, and as a reward I'm buying myself the Eterna II Tenor Trombone so I can join you in the odd tune .



This beauty is a professional trombone at an intermediate price. It's a dual bore open-wrap tenor trombone with an eight and half inch gold brass bell. The bells are hand spun, the same as the Getzen professional trombones. All of the inner hand slide tubes are chrome plated with barrel-shaped stockings. It also comes with a contour case and mouthpiece. This is atop selling trombone for students (which I was about to become) who want to move up from their student horns, and for semi-pro players who need an open wrap trombone that's built to last and sounds great.

The Getzen Company, Inc. occupies a unique position in the band instrument industry. Specializing in the hand-crafting of small brass wind instruments, this more than half-century old firm is owned and operated by Tom Getzen, a third generation band instrument maker who is the grandson of the company's founder, Thos Getzen Esquire.



You guessed right, I'm joining up too! One thing though - and please don't tell Shane - I'm a fully-fledged Trombone player with years of past experience. My son obviously doesn't know this, but I had to let him think this thing through for himself. When he finds out that I'm one of the leading Trombone players in the country I'm going to have some explaining to do, for sure! Now, where's my Eterna?

The fist duet I'm planning on playing with my son Shane is "Seventy-Six Trombones" that was the signature song from the musical play "The Music Man" which was written by Meredith Willson in 1957. Let's play it out Shane while we work the slides together, like the pro's we are and are about to become.

Seventy-six trombones led the big parade
With a hundred and ten cornets close at hand.
They were followed by rows and rows of the finest virtuosos
The cream of every famous band.

Seventy-six trombones caught the morning sun
With a hundred and ten cornets right behind
There were more than a thousand reeds
Springing up like weeds
There were horns of every shape and kind .

There were copper bottom tympani in horse platoons
Thundering, thundering all along the way.
Double bell euphonium's and big bassoons,
Each bassoon having it's big, fat say!

There were fifty mounted cannon in the battery
Thundering, thundering louder than before
Clarinets of every size
And trumpeters who'd improvise
A full octave higher than the score!