East Ridge is the name of several High Schools in America. Of course the schools have many differences, but they do have in common their name, so let us look at the East Ridge High Schools of America.
The first East Ridge High School we shall look at is in Chattanooga. The address of the school is 4320 Bennett Road, Chattanooga, TN 37412. They can be contacted by telephone on 423.867.6200 or by fax on 423.867.6220.
The school takes students from grades nine to twelve and offers a varied curriculum.

The aim of East Ridge High School Chatanooga is to provide their diverse student population with the knowledge, skills and ability they will require to move on from the school to whichever career or further educational establishment they choose. The school hopes to help the students become productive and responsible citizens of the community. This is achieved with a comprehensive and challenging curriculum and a high quality of tutoring.
The staff work as a team to support the preparation of the students for the future by promoting academic and career based development as well as personal and social development. They work to ensure that each student has equal access to rigorous learning, as well as other services and programs necessary for success.
The East Ridge High School Chatanooga is a senior high school of the Hamilton County School System and is fully accredited by the Tennessee State Department of Education and the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. The school is also a member of the Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association.

The school colors are orange and white, the school mascot is names Pioneer, there is a yearbook produced called The Musket ,a school newspaper called Powderhorn and a student handbook called The Trailblazer.

East Ridge High School Chatanooga offers a wide array of sporting activities to the students. In the Spring there is b oy's soccer, s oftball, t ennis, track and baseball. In the Fall there is football, girl's soccer, golf, cheerleading and volleyball and in the Winter, girl's and boy's basketball, wrestling and bowling.

The academic subjects fall under the remit of several departments. These are Math, English, Social Studies, Exceptional Education, Career and Technology, Science, PE/Wellness, JROTC, Fine Arts and Foreign Languages. Our next East Ridge High School is in Pike, Kentucky. The address of the school is 19471 Lick Mountain Rd, Lick Creek, KY 41540 and their telephone number is (606) 835-2811. This is a remote rural school with around 720 students, 37 teachers, and around 66 percent of students qualify for free school dinners. The school takes students from grades nine to twelve.
The school is one of five in the county and it is the largest of the five. East Ridge High School Kentucky was built in 2002 due to the merger of three smaller high schools. Millard High School, Elkhorn City High School, and Feds Creek High School. The school's first principal was Ralph Kilgore, who retired in 2007. The school mascot is called Warrior.
The school has a good reputation for sport and has won many championships over the years including 59th District Boys Basketball Champions and the 54th District Girls Volleyball Champions in 2003, the 59th District Boys Basketball Champions and the KHSAA 15th Regional Boys Basketball Champions in 2004, the 59th District Girls Fast Pitch Softball Champions in 2005, the 56th District Girls Volleyball Champions and the 59th District Cheerleading Champions in 2006, the KHSAA 15th Regional Girls Fast Pitch Softball Champions and the 56th District Girls Volleyball Champions in 2007 and the 59th District Boys Baseball Champions in 2008.