The Mayo Clinic

Efficient medical care is a combination of expertise in clinical practice, education and up-to-date research. One medical center which illustrates this combination is Mayo Clinic. Mayo Clinic is not just a medical center; it is also a teaching and research center that turns doctors, scientists and investigators into actual health workers who really care for patients in the real world.

Mayo Medical School is an integral part of Mayo Clinic, the country's largest private group practice based in three campuses in Jacksonville, Fla., Rochester, Minn., and Scottsdale, Ariz. At all Mayo Clinic sites, the mission is to provide the best care to every patient every day through integrated clinical practice, education and research. Affiliation with regional medical clinics in the Mayo Health System gives students access to additional clinical training and patient care experiences, particularly in rural medicine.

In Arizona, Mayo Clinic offers services in more than 66 specialty and surgical disciplines, including programs in cancer treatment and organ transplantation. The state-of-the-art Mayo Clinic Hospital in northeast Phoenix opened in 1998 and is the first hospital entirely designed and built by Mayo Clinic.


In Florida, Mayo Clinic offers advanced, specialty care including organ transplantation programs such as blood and marrow, kidney, pancreas, heart, lung and liver. Mayo Clinic hospital is on the Jacksonville campus.

In Rochester, the original Mayo Clinic has grown to become home to Mayo Medical School, as well as a large integrated medical center offering patients virtually every medical expertise, treatment and diagnostic tool. The Mayo Clinic campus in downtown Rochester is comprised of many buildings connected through an extensive network of skyways and subways.

Mayo Clinic Rochester offers medical services in the areas of dermatology, allergy, gastroenterology, hematology, nephrology and hypertension, neurology, oncology, dermatology, otorhinolaryngology/audiology, psychiatry and psychology, radiology, radiation oncology, and rheumatology. The company also offers breast cancer diagnosis, heart and vascular disease treatment, child and adolescent care, dental care, emergency, endocrine and metabolic disorder treatment, family and general medicine, laboratory medicine and pathology, medical genetics, nicotine dependence, nursing, obstetrics, pain clinic, physical medicine and rehabilitation, pulmonary and critical care medicine, reproductive endocrinology and infertility, and sports medicine services, as well as preventive, occupational, and aerospace medicine services. In addition, it provides anesthesiology, cardiac, colon and rectal, cosmetic, gynecology, obstetrics, ophthalmology, oral and maxillofacial, general, orthopedic, plastic, thoracic, urology, vascular, and neurosurgeries, as well as bone marrow, heart, kidney, liver, lung, and pancreas transplantation services.


The Mayo Health System family of clinics, hospitals and other health-care facilities serves 64 communities in Minnesota, Iowa and Wisconsin. Through this system Mayo offers medical students additional clinical experiences.

Internal medicine is a branch of medicine dealing with adult diseases and their treatment, prevention and diagnosis. Doctors who specialize in this area are called internists. These doctors are board certified to manage adult patients with various complex illnesses resulting from multi-system disturbances. Internists at the Mayo Clinic are especially trained to diagnose and treat hospitalized and ambulatory patients with various undifferentiated illnesses. These internists are hospitalists working in teaching and research at the same time.
The Department of Internal Medicine is composed of the following divisions:

Allergy is also hypersensitivity of the body's immune system to various stimuli. This condition results when a person reacts abnormally to substances from his or her environment. The substance that causes such reaction is often termed as an allergen. Allergy is a disorder of the immune system;this condition may be acquired either earlier or later in life. A doctor can often predict the onset and the frequency of allergic attacks of the individual. Allergy triggers can be food, drugs, pollen, smoke, rubber, cosmetics or many other various things.

Allergology is the study of allergy and hypersensitivity reactions. One can choose from various allergologists and immunologists at Mayo Clinic so that hypersensitivity disorders are best understood and treated.
Mayo surgeons perform thousands of operations each year using state-of-the-art technology, including minimally invasive techniques and "off pump bypass" heart procedures. Mayo Clinic offers the full spectrum of cardiothoracic and cardiovascular surgical services.
Community Internal Medicine deals with the diagnosis and treatment of community acquired adult disorders. The multidisciplinary team of specialists at Mayo Clinic aims to promote wellness and prevention through community adult medicine.
Mayo Clinic has one of the largest group of endocrinologists in the world, with more than 50 endocrinologists who evaluate and treat patients for endocrine and metabolic disorders. The body's endocrine system includes the pancreas, the thyroid, parathyroid, pineal, hypothalamus, adrenal and pituitary glands, and the ovaries and testes. It also involves many other organs which respond to, modify, or metabolize hormones. Mayo endocrinologists are careful to evaluate the relationship between nutrition and human disease in an attempt to improve and maintain a patient's health. State-of-the-art diagnosis and therapy options available for endocrinology patients at Mayo include: Adrenal venous sampling Bariatric surgery Clinical dietetics Diabetes nurse educator program Endoscopic trans-nasal pituitary surgery Endocrine pathology Endocrine general surgery Gamma-knife radiosurgery Grave's ophthalmology High-resolution imaging (MRI, CT) Home feeding program Hospital nutrition consulting services Inferior petrosal sinus sampling Infertility/andrology services Intensive treatment for lipid disorders Intensive insulin therapy for diabetics Minimally invasive adrenal surgery Minimally invasive parathyroid surgery Multiple endocrine neoplasia Octreotide scanning and therapy Osteoporosis and metabolic bone disease Pituitary-gonad-adrenal treatment Thyroid cancer Thyroid disorders Treatment for pregnancy-induced diabetes Transplant services Ulcer and wound care

There are five Mayo endocrinologists in Florida, 43 in Minnesota and five in Arizona. They work closely with Mayo specialists in ophthalmology, otolaryngology, radiation oncology, surgery, obstetrics, transplantation and other specialties to provide a multidisciplinary approach to patients' problems. For more than 30 years, Mayo Clinic's Executive Health Program has combined medical expertise with efficiency to meet the needs of busy executives. The program offers a comprehensive examination with access to the full resources of Mayo's medical, surgical and laboratory facilities in a convenient one- to two-day period. (More days may be required if the executive requires additional subspecialty tests or examinations.)

The Executive Health program offers an efficient, cost-effective way to maximize a leader's health and reduce the chance of long-term leave related to disability, illness or health concerns. Research conducted in September 2005 determined the prevalence of serious diseases and conditions in Mayo Clinic Executive Health Program patients that may otherwise have gone undetected. The results: 4.9% diagnosed with a potentially life-threatening disease 34.4% identified as having a previously undiagnosed, severe condition 47.6% identified as having risk factors for a serious condition

The Executive Health Program blends Mayo's traditional diagnostic expertise with the latest in preventive medicine. Your evaluation is individualized according to your personal health needs and is strictly confidential. One physician, a specialist in internal and preventive medicine, will coordinate your care. The program is offered at all three Mayo Clinic locations: Florida; Minnesota; and Arizona.

Patients and their families from more than 150 countries around the world travel each year to Mayo Clinic locations in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota, to benefit from a tradition of excellence in patient care dating back more than 100 years.

International patients journey to Mayo Clinic for a broad range of patient-focused care and service, from general exams to diagnosis and treatment for both common and complex medical conditions. Most are referred by family members or friends and schedule the appointments themselves; some are referred by their local physicians, who collaborate closely with Mayo Clinic staff.

A well-coordinated, team approach is a hallmark of Mayo Clinic's model of caring for its patients. Mayo's collaborative style offers a uniquely comprehensive approach to medical care and is among the primary reasons Mayo Clinic has earned its reputation for excellence. Gastroenterologists and hepatologists at Mayo Clinic specialize in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the pancreas, liver, gallbladder, esophagus, stomach, small intestine and colon. More than 100 specialists work at the three Mayo locations, one of the largest group of specialtists in the world.

Mayo resources include the latest advances in endoscopic equipment. With these minimally invasive capabilities, physicians insert tubes through the mouth, nose or rectum to examine and treat problems of the digestive tract. Annually, staff members perform more than 50,000 minimally invasive, endoscopic procedures, including colonoscopy, small bowel enteroscopy, laser endoscopy, endoscopic ultrasonography and photodynamic therapy.

Among the areas of service offered in Gastroenterology are: Anorectal function testing; evaluation of constipation and fecal incontinence Barrett's esophagus Clinical nutrition with emphasis on malnutrition from gastrointestinal diseases Diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopy, including enteral stents, biliary stents, banding of esophageal varices, small-bowel enteroscopy, endoscopic treatment for gastrointestinal bleeding and endoscopic ultrasound Diseases of the pancreas including acute and chronic pancreatitis, hereditary pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, pancreatic cysts, adult cystic fibrosis Esophageal diseases and esophageal cancer Gastrointestinal cancer (anus, colon, rectum, stomach) Heartburn and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), including radiofrequency treatments and anti-reflux surgery Hepatobiliary disease, including evaluations for liver transplant and postoperative care Inflammatory bowel disease, including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis Malabsorption and malnutrition Testing for chronic constipation, including radionuclide gastric and intestinal transit studies, 24-hour pH monitoring, gastroduodenal motility, ambulatory motility recordings and provocative testing for noncardiac chest pain Photodynamic therapy for Barrett's esophagus or advanced esophageal cancer Swallowing disorders and noncardiac chest pain

The physicians in General Internal Medicine manage all aspects of an adult patient's general health care and provide seamless referrals to Mayo specialists, according to each patient's needs. Mayo's internal medicine practices includes: Care for patients with undefined symptoms and complaints (shortness of breath, chest pain, abdominal pain, back pain, etc.) who need help in diagnosing their illness Coordination of care from surgeons and other specialized care providers at Mayo Clinic Preventive medicine screening care (mammograms, Pap smears, routine colon cancer screening evaluations, cholesterol screening, blood pressure screening, etc.) Collaborative care of patients with chronic medical illnesses (high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, emphysema, etc.) throughout the various stages of their illness Comprehensive management of medical needs for hospitalized patients Dedicated hematologists at all three Mayo Clinic locations diagnose and treat disorders of the blood. More than 60 hematologists at Mayo care for patients and conduct research to improve treatment for hematologic diseases.

Hematologists manage blood diseases using the following tools: Addition and removal of blood components as needed Biological therapy for benign and malignant blood disorders Chemotherapy Growth factor drugs Immunosuppressive drugs Stem cell and bone marrow transplantation

Mayo hematologists work closely with colleagues in medical and radiation oncology, transplantation and other specialties in the care of their patients.

The 12 hematologists in Florida, 44 in Minnesota and 10 in Arizona participate in numerous clinical trials to improve treatment at all Mayo Clinic locations. Through the Mayo Clinic Cancer Center and other organizations, such as the North Central Cancer Treatment Group, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group and the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, Mayo patients have access to the latest clinical trials for blood disorders.

Specialists at Mayo Clinic are experienced at treating common and rare blood diseases including: Anemia Bleeding and clotting disorders Enlarged lymph nodes or spleen Hematologic malignancies Hypercoagulable states and platelet disorders Immune cytopenias Leukemias Lymphproliferative disorders Monoclonal gammopathies of undetermined significance Myelodysplastic syndromes Myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia Multiple myeloma Myeloproliferative disorders Porphyria Primary amyloidosis Thrombocytopenia

Each year thousands of patients suffering from any of more than 200 kinds of cancer seek treatment through Mayo Clinic's oncology departments. The departments encompass medical oncology, which administers chemotherapy and immunotherapy, and radiation oncology, which treats cancers with radiation. The departments practice in conjunction with the Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, which ranks in the top tier of cancer centers in the United States for cancer research, clinical treatment and education.

The most common cancers seen at Mayo Clinic are cancer of the colon and rectum, breast, prostate, and lung; but oncologists have extensive experience in the diagnosis and treatment of every kind of cancer, including brain tumors, sarcomas, melanoma, kidney cancer, ovarian cancer, hepatoma, biliary cancer, pancreatic cancer and neuroendocrine cancers.

Patients have access to novel drug, immunologic, and gene therapies through clinical trials.

Innovative and advanced cancer care is available at Mayo Clinic through state-of-the-art facilities and expert staff. Mayo's oncology services include: Bone marrow transplantation Electronic portal imaging device (EPID) target localization Familial cancer genetics screening and counseling Stereotactic radiosurgery High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy Hyperthermia Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) Intraoperative radiation therapy (both with HDR and linear accelerator) Intravascular brachytherapy Low dose rate brachytherapy for ocular melanoma Permanent prostate brachytherapy Radiofrequency ablation of tumors Small field conformal radiation therapy

Oncologists work closely with physicians from virtually every speciality at Mayo in the care of patients with cancer. The general internist acts not only as a diagnostician but also a consultant in disease prevention and health promotion. Internists are trained to care for patients with multi-system diseases. More than 40 physicians at Mayo Clinic specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of infectious diseases. The infectious disease practices at each Mayo location are designed to meet the needs of patients in the hospital and in the outpatient setting. Experts within the specialty work identify and treat infections that arise from exposure to infectious diseases, or that follow organ transplantation and other surgical procedures. The five physicians in Florida, 33 in Minnesota and three in Arizona also conduct research to improve knowledge and effective treatment for infectious diseases.

Focus areas for Mayo infectious disease experts include: Antibiotic therapy Blood stream infections Bone and joint infections Central nervous system infections including meningitis Endocarditis Fever of unknown origin Fungal infections HIV infection and AIDS Immunizations Infections associated with medical devices and procedures Infections associated with organ transplantation Infections related to compromised immunity (prevention and treatment) Meningitis Osteomyelitis Parasitic diseases Pneumonia Postsurgical infections Sepsis Sexually transmitted diseases Travel-associated diseases (prevention and treatment) Tuberculosis Viral infections

Two special services available in Infectious Diseases in Minnesota are the HIV Clinic and Travel and Geographic Medicine Clinic. The Division of Nephrology and Hypertension at Mayo Clinic sees more than 4,000 patients with kidney problems each year, and more than 30,000 patients who suffer from hypertension.

Patients who choose Mayo Clinic have access to one of the largest groups of practicing nephrologists in the country. Currently, over 45 nephrologists practice at Mayo's three sites, including 28 specialists in treating hypertension.

Mayo nephrologists and hypertension specialists work closely with other specialists, including cardiologists, endocrinologists, pharmacists, nurses, educators and dietitians to deliver high-quality, cost-effective care to patients who suffer from problems involving the kidneys, uncontrolled hypertension or complex blood pressure issues.

Comprehensive services for nephrology outpatient and inpatient care, dialysis, and kidney transplant services are provided at all three Mayo Clinic sites.
Experts in Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine at Mayo Clinic provide comprehensive consultative, diagnostic and therapeutic services for patients with illnesses that affect the lungs and breathing. The latest technology is used to provide state-of-the-art care in both the outpatient and hospital settings, including the intensive care units.

Services offered through the Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine specialty include: Outpatient clinics for evaluation and treatment of various lung conditions Hospital inpatient services for evaluation and treatment of various lung conditions Intensive care services for management and treatment of the critically ill Lung transplantation Sleep disorders evaluation and treatment Bronchoscopic diagnosis and treatment (e.g., laser therapy and airway stenting) Access to various diagnostic and treatment protocols Pulmonary Function Laboratory Pulmonary Rehabilitation Program Training programs for Pulmonary and Critical Care specialists

Clinical expertise, research, and education are integrated to provide the best care available while advancing the science of pulmonary and critical care medicine for the future. There are 39 critical and pulmonary care specialists in Minnesota, 10 pulmonary and five critical care specialists in Florida and five pulmonary and five critical care specialists in Arizona. Rheumatologists at Mayo Clinic provide state-of-the-art diagnosis and treatment for diseases that affect the body's connective tissue. Physicians in the specialty see nearly 20,000 patients each year. Mayo's rheumatologists treat more than 100 types of arthritis, including common diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, and rare diseases such as relapsing polychondritis and multicentric reticulohistiocytosis. Additionally physicians offer consultative and continuing care for patients with regional musculoskeletal disorders such as shoulder pain, hip pain, and knee pain. Preoperative evaluation and recommendations for patients considering joint replacement and arthritis-related reconstructive surgeries are also provided. Rheumatologic services offered at Mayo include: Outpatient consultations Outpatient specialty care for patients with chronic rheumatic diseases Hospital consultations Diagnostic and therapeutic intra-articular and soft tissue injections and aspirations Outpatient diagnostic arthroscopy Education on rheumatologic diseases and treatments Clinical trials

Mayo Clinic physicians have active basic and clinical research projects and also are involved in training of rheumatology specialists. There are five rheumatologists in Florida, 15 in Minnesota and four in Arizona. Pediatric cases are treated in Minnesota. Sleep disorders from a multitude of causes. Our sleep experts at Mayo Clinic are adept in figuring out the causative etiology of sleep-related disorders so that an effective plan of treatment can be executed.


Pulmonary/Critical Care specialists have expertise in a range of respiratory conditions including but not limited to: lung cancer diagnosis and treatment; chronic obstructive lung diseases including asthma; interstitial lung diseases; pulmonary vascular disease including pulmonary hypertension; sleep disorders; acute and chronic respiratory failure; and various lung infections.

Mayo Clinic's dermatology departments care for both common and rare problems of skin, hair, nails and mucous membranes. More than 35 board-certified physicians provide care in medical and surgical dermatology, including dermatopathology and micrographic surgery.

The Dermatology Department in Minnesota offers one of the nation's few comprehensive inpatient treatment programs for managing complex dermatologic problems.

The six dermatologists at Mayo Clinic in Florida, more than 20 in Minnesota and nine in Arizona treat every kind of dermatologic problem, including:

Autoimmune diseases
Blistering diseases
Cutaneous lymphomas
Dermatitis
Dermatomyositis
Genetic disease of the skin
Granuloma annulare
Hair loss
Hyperhidrosis
Lupus erythematosus
Melanoma
Non-melanoma skin cancer
Oral Lichen Planus
Oral mucous membrane disease
Pediatric dermatology (Minnesota)
Pigmentation disorders
Porphyrias
Psoriasis
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Scleroderma/morphea
Skin cancers
Skin infections
Skin ulcers
Sun sensitivity
Urticaria/angioedema
Vascular abnormalities
Vasculitis
Vitiligo

Emergency Medicine specialists work at all three Mayo Clinic locations to treat life-threatening illnesses. Teams of board-certified physicians, registered nurses, and other specially trained staff are available at all times to treat anyone seeking emergency medical care. Each year Mayo emergency care physicians see more than 80,000 patients in the emergency care setting.

In Minnesota, 26 physicians provide care through the Emergency Department at Saint Marys Hospital. The facility is currently working on Trauma Level I accreditation, offering the highest level of emergency care possible.

In Florida, five physicians provide care through the Emergency Medicine Department at Mayo Clinic hospital.

In Arizona, Emergency Medicine is available at Mayo Clinic Hospital in northeast Phoenix. Family medicine physicians at Mayo Clinic provide ongoing primary care and comprehensive medical evaluations for patients of all ages who live in Florida, Minnesota and Arizona. Diagnostic and surgical procedures performed in the Family Medicine specialty include: Acute care for short-term illness Annual health evaluations Biopsy and excision of skin lesions Flu shots, allergy injections and immunizations Incision and drainage of abscesses Intrauterine device (IUD) placement and removal Joint injections Lab services Newborn and well-child care Norplant placement and removal Obstetrics, including prenatal care, delivery and postpartum care Ongoing care of chronic problems Palliative care Physical exams for sports, school and summer camp Preventive care, health screening and physical exams for individuals of all ages Routine care for women, including Pap smears, pelvic and breast exams Special procedures such as flexible sigmoidoscopy, colposcopy, minor surgery (including vasectomy and circumcision), and exercise treadmill testing Treatment of complex and long-term medical conditions including diabetes and high blood pressure Treatment of minor injuries such as lacerations, as well as casting and splinting sprains and broken bones X-ray, Mammography, Bone Densitometry

Family medicine physicians at Mayo Clinic provide ongoing primary care and comprehensive medical evaluations for patients of all ages who live in Florida, Minnesota and Arizona. Diagnostic and surgical procedures performed in the Family Medicine specialty include: Acute care for short-term illness Annual health evaluations Biopsy and excision of skin lesions Flu shots, allergy injections and immunizations Incision and drainage of abscesses Intrauterine device (IUD) placement and removal Joint injections Lab services Newborn and well-child care Norplant placement and removal Obstetrics, including prenatal care, delivery and postpartum care Ongoing care of chronic problems Palliative care Physical exams for sports, school and summer camp Preventive care, health screening and physical exams for individuals of all ages Routine care for women, including Pap smears, pelvic and breast exams Special procedures such as flexible sigmoidoscopy, colposcopy, minor surgery (including vasectomy and circumcision), and exercise treadmill testing Treatment of complex and long-term medical conditions including diabetes and high blood pressure Treatment of minor injuries such as lacerations, as well as casting and splinting sprains and broken bones X-ray, Mammography, Bone Densitometry

Specialists in Psychiatry and Psychology at Mayo Clinic provide comprehensive evaluations, diagnosis and treatment for people with psychiatric problems. Special areas of expertise include: Psychopharmacology consultations Evaluation and treatment of mood disorders Evaluation and treatment of anxiety disorders Psychotherapy Geriatric psychiatry Evaluation and treatment of sleep disorders, including sleep apnea, narcolepsy, parasomnias and insomnia Evaluation and treatment of headaches (in consultation with the Department of Neurology) Chemical dependency treatment in patients with dual diagnoses (psychiatric disorder and substance abuse) Inpatient care for psychiatric problems is provided at the Psychiatry Treatment Center, part of Saint Marys Hospital in Rochester, Minn. Rochester also has a number of specialists trained in treating childhood psychiatric and psychological disorders

Radiologists at Mayo Clinic provide patients with the latest in high-quality diagnostic and treatment imaging services. Working with state-of-the-art equipment and assisted by skilled technologists and nurses, Mayo radiologists perform and interpret more than a million examinations yearly. Radiologists support every medical department with their services.

Mayo Clinic offers an unparalleled number of diagnostic and therapeutic radiological procedures, including: Abdominal imaging Biopsy, using CT, ultrasound and fluoroscopic procedures Bone mineral analysis Breast imaging Cardiac radiology Computed tomography Coronary artery calcification scoring Lung cancer screening Diagnostic imaging in oncology Gastrointestinal radiology General radiology, chest and skeletal Genitourinary radiology Hospital radiology Interventional neuroradiology Interventional radiology, including biliary and genitourinary and ablation of neoplasms, angioplasty, guided biopsy and aspiration, neuroradiology and core breast biopsy Image-guided treatment of liver tumors Chemoembolization of tumors Uterine fibroid embolization Aortic aneurysm stent grafting Magnetic resonance imaging, including MR angiography Mammography, including preoperative wire localization and stereotactic needle biopsy Musculoskeletal imaging Neurologic radiology Treatment of vertebral compression fractures with vertebroplasty Diskography for degenerative disk disease Nuclear radiology Bone scans Thyroid scans Biliary scans Nuclear cardiology PET Sentinel lymphoscintigraphy Treatment of prostatic carcinoma with ultrasound-guided radioactive seed implants Ultrasound, including duplex and color-flow imaging Uroradiology Physics Thoracic radiology Ultrasonography Vascular radiology

Many radiologists at Mayo Clinic are also involved in training new specialists and researching new radiological services. There are 35 radiologists and physicists working at Mayo Clinic in Florida, 150 in Minnesota, and 33 in Arizona.

Mayo Clinic doctors perform more than 1,100 transplants a year, making it the largest transplant program in the United States.


Anesthesiologists at each Mayo Clinic location offer outstanding anesthetic care for Mayo Clinic patients. Anesthesiologists care for more than 100,000 patients each year. More than 140 staff doctors practice at the three Mayo Clinic locations (22 anesthesiologists in Jacksonville, Fla., 106 in Rochester, Minn., and 22 in Arizona). They are assisted by numerous residents, nurse anesthetists and respiratory therapists. Among the specialized services provided by the Anesthesiology Department are: Administration of anesthesia in all subspecialties Preoperative medical evaluations Perioperative pain management Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography Critical care Management of acute and chronic pain Diagnosis of acute and chronic pain syndromes Injections and nerve blocks Spinal-cord stimulation Spinal-infusion systems Obstetrical analgesia and anesthesia The gynecology practices at Mayo Clinic are designed to meet the needs of women throughout the stages of life, from the teenage years, to pregnancy, menopause and beyond. Gynecologists at all three Mayo locations specialize in compassionate care for a range of reproductive health and pelvic problems.

Routine medical screenings and treatments include: Adolescent gynecology Annual Pap and pelvic examinations Breast cancer screening Contraception and family planning Diagnosis and treatment for sexually transmitted disease Infertility treatment Treatment for abnormal bleeding Treatment for premenstrual syndrome Treatment for endometriosis Management of menopause Management of menstrual irregularities Urinary incontinence Vaginitis

Gynecologic surgery, oncology and reconstruction services include: Hysterectomy, traditional and laparoscopic Hysteroscopic endometrial oblation, excision of endometrial septum, excision of submucosal fibroids, polypectomies and sterilization (no excisions) Laparoscopic hysterectomy, oophorectomy (removal of ovaries), myomectomy (removal of fibroids), removal of ovarian cysts, treatment of vaginal fistulas and treatment of pelvic endometriosis Treatment for postmenopausal bleeding Treatment of gestational trophoblastic disease Treatment for bladder and bowel dysfunctions, including urinary and fecal incontinence Treatment for genitourinary and rectovaginal fistulas Comprehensive care, including chemotherapy and radiation, as appropriate, for all gynecologic malignancies, including cancer of the cervix, uterus, ovaries, vulva and vagina Pelvic exenteration Radical vulvectomy Surgery for urogenital and anogenital fistulas Reconstructive surgery for genital and rectal prolapse, internal and external female genitalia and abdominal-wall defects Surgical correction of Müllerian anomalies Management of menopause Diagnosis and management of uterine fibroids, including uterine fibroid embolization when necessary Mayo Clinic's neurosurgery departments have extensive experience and expertise in caring for patients with problems involving the head, spine, cerebrovascular system and peripheral nerves. The 18 neurosurgeons at the three Mayo Clinic locations perform more than 4,000 neurosurgical procedures each year. Among their special capabilities are: Computer-assisted stereotactic surgery and radiosurgery to accurately locate, remove or otherwise treat brain tumors Computer-assisted surgeries for spinal disorders including microscopic and endoscopic surgery Intracranial vascular surgery Carotid artery surgery and endovascular treatment Surgical treatment for epilepsy including vagal nerve stimulation Surgical treatment for movement disorders including Parkinson's disease Spinal tumors and vascular lesions Surgical treatment for trigeminal neuralgia and hemifacial spasm Surgery for pituitary tumors Multidisciplinary treatment of complex skull base tumors Multidisciplinary treatment of complex peripheral nerve disorders

Mayo neurosurgeons work closely with other specialists, especially Neurology, Neuro-oncology, Neuro-radiology, Orthopedics, Otorhinolaryngology (ENT) and Endocrinology so that patients have access to a broad range of expertise. They are aided by highly skilled support staff and state-of-the-art technology and facilities.

Mayo Clinic neurosurgeons practice in an atmosphere of scientific inquiry, carefully analyzing their large-volume surgical practice for ways to improve. More than 45 ophthalmologists and optometrists at Mayo Clinic offer patients a full range of ophthalmologic and optometric care, from routine eye examinations to complex surgical procedures. Ophthalmologists at Mayo Clinic have expertise in managing eye problems such as cataracts, glaucoma, macular degeneration, corneal and eye surface disease, crossed eyes, as well as many other eye issues. Additionally, Mayo Clinic ophthalmologists have special expertise for taking care of cancer of the eye, diseases of the eyelids and orbit, vitreorentinal diseases and neuro-ophthalmological disorders.

At Mayo Clinic, treatment for eye problems related to another disease - such as diabetes, autoimmune or thyroid disease - is approached from a multidisciplinary perspective, involving all experts necessary for optimal medical care. Eye care experts at Mayo also offer refractive laser surgery, cosmetic eye surgery and contact lens services. Both Florida and Minnesota offer full-service optical shops.

There are nine staff members in Florida, 29 in Minnesota and eight in Arizona.

Department members in Minnesota are involved in several aspects of research: national multicenter studies, clinical studies and basic science research. Orthopedic surgeons at Mayo Clinic specialize in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disorders of the musculoskeletal system. More than 65 physicians specialize in surgery, research and clinical consultations, treating more than 70,000 patients annually with high-quality, cost-effective orthopedic care.

There are nine orthopedic surgeons practicing in Florida, 50 in Minnesota, and 11 in Arizona. Only the Rochester practice treats children.

The department has expertise in the following areas: Adult joint reconstruction and revision Foot and ankle injuries Hand surgery Microvascular procedures Sports injuries Tumor surgery for bone cancers (osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma) and soft tissue sarcomas such as rhabdomyosarcoma Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery is a specialty available only at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. Maxillofacial surgeons diagnose and treat congenital and acquired diseases and deformities of the face, mouth, teeth, jaws and neck. Patients of all ages are treated. Pathologic, functional, and cosmetic surgical procedures are available for patients. The surgeons in this group work closely with colleagues in both medicine and dentistry.

The Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery practice at Mayo Clinic includes a full range of diagnostic, outpatient and inpatient services. There are five surgeons practicing at Mayo Clinic. Pain Medicine Experts at all three Mayo Clinic locations provide services for the management of acute and chronic pain through special Pain Clinics. These services are designed to restore function and increase the quality of life for patients who experience pain syndromes. Plastic Surgery

Skilled plastic surgeons at Mayo Clinic provide a wide range of reconstructive and cosmetic surgery services. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery is staffed by 16 plastic surgeons with specialized training and skills in one or more of the following surgical subspecialties: Aesthetic plastic surgery Reconstructive surgery Craniofacial surgery Reconstructive microsurgery Pediatric plastic surgery Laser surgery Hand surgery

There are three plastic surgeons practicing at Mayo Clinic in Florida, 11 in Minnesota and four in Arizona. The plastic surgeons work closely with physicians from other specialties to offer patients comprehensive medical care to meet their reconstructive and cosmetic surgical needs. Surgeons in Dermatology, Otolaryngology (ENT) and Oral/Maxillofacial Surgery also have training and expertise in reconstructive and cosmetic surgery. General surgeons perform consultation and surgery on medical conditions involving the breast, endocrine system, gastrointestinal tract, colon, liver, pancreas and rectum. Mayo Clinic general surgeons are among the most experienced groups in the country. The 30+ surgeons perform more than 10,000 surgical procedures annually.

There are six general surgeons in Florida, 16 in Minnesota and 15 in Arizona. The surgeons at Mayo are dedicated to continuing improvement and are involved with clinical trials to advance treatments. The general surgeons work closely with other specialists involved in each patient's care to diagnose and provide timely surgical intervention for complex conditions. Urologists at Mayo Clinic provide expert care for male and female patients of all ages who suffer from problems of the urinary tract. Urologists also attend to diseases and conditions of the male reproductive organs. (Gynecologists treat problems of the female reproductive organs.) Mayo Clinic urologists perform hundreds of minimally invasive operations each year for a variety of urologic problems. These new types of minimally invasive surgical procedures produce excellent results, and patients often have shorter hospital stays, less discomfort and bleeding, and a shorter recovery period including less time away from work and regular activities. Two types of minimally invasive surgery that Mayo Clinic urologists are well known for are kidney operations and endoscopic procedures used to diagnose and treat upper urinary tract disorders.

Mayo physicians are leaders in clinical research that enhances the capability to offer the most advanced treatments available. Specialty services offered through Urology include: Bladder reconstruction Brachytherapy (radioactive seed implantation) Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy to destroy kidney stones Endoscopic and percutaneous techniques Genitourinary reconstruction Laparoscopic procedures including nephrectomy Medical and surgical treatment for sexual dysfunction and impotence Minimally invasive techniques for benign prostatic hyperplasia and other conditions Minimally invasive injection therapies and other procedures for incontinence Robot-assisted prostatectomy Organ-sparing surgery for kidney cancer Penile reconstructive surgery Percutaneous radiofrequency ablation of kidney tumors Urodynamic evaluation

There are five urologists practicing at Mayo Clinic in Florida, 20 in Minnesota and seven in Arizona.