Career counselors say a good job interview starts well before the jobseeker and interviewer meet. Preparation can be as important as the interview itself. Researching, practicing, and dressing appropriately are the first steps to making the most of a job interview. Research. One of the best, but most fre-quently overlooked, ways to demonstrate enthusiasm for a job is to research both the company and the position for which you are being interviewed. Employers say they are impressed by well-informed jobseekers. Before arriving for an interview, you should know what the company does, how large it is, any recent changes it has undergone, and what role you could play in its organization. Try to learn about the company's goals and values. With these facts, you can show how your qualifica-tions match the company's needs. The company itself is often the easiest place to start your search. Many businesses fill their websites with information tailored to jobseekers. These sites often include a history of the company and a description of its products and customers. And many companies' human resources departments will send recruiting information if you request it. Public libraries and career centers also have valuable information about employers, including companies' annual reports to shareholders, reports kept by local chambers of commerce, trade journals, and business indexes, such as Hoover's Business Index and Dun and Bradstreet. Practice describing yourself. Another important step in preparing for a job interview is to practice describing your professional characteristics. Think of examples from past jobs, schoolwork, and activities to illustrate important skills. Recalling accomplishments beforehand, when you don't have to respond under interview pressure, will strengthen your answers during the actual event. Every interview will be different, and there may always be surprising questions. Nevertheless, interviewers suggest rehearsing with a career counselor or friend to gain confidence and poise. As a starting point, try to respond aloud to the following: How would you describe yourself? What did you like most about your last job? What types of courses do you enjoy most? Why should I select you over other applicants? What are your greatest strengths and weaknesses? What are your hobbies? Tell me more about the project you described on your resume. Describe a work or school-related problem and how you solved it. Tell me about a time you worked as part of a team. What are your short-term goals? Why do you want to work in this occupation and for this company? Each question gives you an opportunity to illustrate your favorable characteristics. When responding, focus on subjects related to the job. For example, if asked to describe yourself, talk about your professional characteristics and background, not your personal life. Some questions -- such as those about hobbies or interests -- may seem irrelevant. Interviewers ask these types of questions to learn about your personality and test your interpersonal skills. In addition, answering questions about your hobbies or interests allows you to highlight some of your other strengths. Participating in a sport might demonstrate teamwork; ability in a craft, such as needlepoint, shows an attention to detail. Career centers and libraries have many books with additional questions and possible answers. The goal is not to memorize responses to these questions but to become comfortable speaking about yourself, your training and experience, and your career goals. Responding to interview questions should not sound as if you are reciting a script. Whatever the question, be ready to accentuate the positive. The interviewer might ask for a weakness or failure; choose one that does not affect your ability to do the job, or describe a shortcoming you are working to overcome. For example, if interviewing for an entry-level job, cite your lack of paid experience. If there are weaknesses evident on your resume; or transcript, such as being fired from a job or receiving poor grades, rehearse an explanation before the interview in case you are asked about them. Focus on what you learned from the experience, being careful never to criticize a previous employer or coworker. Dress professionally. Securing a job is much easier if you look the part. A useful guideline is to dress as you would for an important day on the job, like a meeting with a supervisor or a presentation to a client. Clothes should be clean, well fitting, and wrinkle free. Most employers expect jobseekers to wear a traditional two-piece suit, preferably in a conservative color such as navy blue, gray, or black. The object is to look reliable, not trendy. Many employers say that women's skins should be knee-length or below. Polished, closed-toe shoes complete the professional image. Avoid last-minute clothing disasters by trying on your suit a few days before the interview. And plan for the unexpected: if you will wear a skirt, buy an extra pair of stockings; if you have shoes that tie, get more shoelaces. Bring such extras along with you the day of the interview. Keep hair neat by tying it back, putting it up, or cutting it short. Avoid cologne and perfume, large pieces of jewelry, and heavy or unnatural makeup. These distract the interviewer from your qualifications. FIRST IMPRESSIONS AT THE INTERVIEW On the day of the interview, give yourself plenty of time to get ready for and travel to the interview. Plan to arrive 10 to 15 minutes early. (Some career counselors suggest making a rest tun to the interview sire in advance re familiarize yourself with the travel route.) Consider carrying a briefcase to the interview. In addition to giving you a professional look, a briefcase serves a function: it gives portability to things you'll want at the interview. These include a pen and paper to record important information, such as the proper spelling of the interviewer's name and the time and date of followup interviews; copies of your r?sum? or application and references; and examples of your work, such as writing samples. Butterflies. Most people are nervous when interviewing. But remember: You have been asked to interview for the job because the employer believes you could be right for it. The interview is your chance to confirm that belief and establish rapport. To reduce nervousness, interviewers recommend getting a good night's sleep and maintaining your usual morning routine-if you never eat breakfast, for example, don't cat a hearty morning meal on interview day. They also recommend calling to mind some of your happiest memories or proudest moments before arriving for the interview. And they remind jobseekers that each opening you interview for is not the only one that exists. More than one company recruits for jobs. If one interview doesn't go well, another will. First impressions. The interview begins the moment you arrive. Everyone you meet, from the receptionist to the hiring manager, will form an impression of you. To ensure the impression is positive, remember that your words and mannerisms will affect the image you project. When greeting people, smile warmly and shake hands. Make eye contact and maintain good posture. Don't create a negative impression by using slang, chewing gum, smoking cigarettes, or giving curt, oneword answers. Interviewers suggest rehearsing with a career counselor or friend to gain confidence and poise. The goal is to become comfortable speaking about yourself, your training and experience, and your career goals. Standard politeness is important in an interview because the interviewer knows very little about you. To be safe, never use the interviewer's first name unless you are invited to do so, and don't sit down until the interviewer does. RESPONDING TO QUESTIONS After introductions, the interviewer will probably explain the job in more detail, discuss the company, or initiate friendly conversation. The interviewer will then ask questions to try re gauge how well you would fill the position. When responding to the interviewer, avoid giving vague answers such as, "I want to work with people" (or animals, or cars, or whatever the job entails). Instead, describe the specific ways you want to work with them. You might also give examples of how you have successfully done so in the past. Focus on your strengths, but always tell the truth. Responding to interview questions allows you to describe your best work-related characteristics. Many employers use resumes as guides, asking for additional details during the interview. In addition to finding out more information, they may be trying to see how well you can communicate your work to others. Some interviewers ask questions about real-life job situations. For example, they might ask candidates for a retail job how they would handle customer complaints. Rather than trying to stay in control, let the interviewer direct the session. Listen attentively, and be sure to answer the question asked. Watch the interviewer's mannerisms for clues about whether to elaborate or keep your responses short. Some jobseekers are so focused on specific answers, they forget to relax and connect with the interviewer. An interview should be conversational. However, that does not mean you are expected to speak without pause. You should stop to consider an answer before responding to difficult or unexpected questions. And if a question is confusing, ask for clarification. Think about how you would answer these questions: Tell me about yourself. Keep your answer to the professional realm only. Review your past positions, education and other strengths. What do you know about our organization? If you've done your research, you should have no problem with this one. Be positive. Why are you interested in this position? Relate how you feel your qualifications match the job requirements and express your desire to work for the company. What are the most significant accomplishments in your career thus far? Pick recent accomplishments that relate to this position and its requirements. Describe a situation in which your work was criticized. Focus on how you solved the situation and how you became a better person because of it. How would you describe your personality? How do you perform under pressure? What have you done to improve yourself over the past year? What did you like least about your last position? Why are you considering leaving your current position? What is your ideal working environment? How would your coworkers describe you? What do you think of your boss? Have you ever fired anyone? What was the situation and how did you handle it? Are you creative? What are your career goals? Where do you see yourself in two years? Why should we hire you? What salary are you looking for? What other types of jobs/companies are you considering? YOUR TURN: ASKING QUESTIONS At some point, usually toward the end of the interview, you will have the opportunity to ask your own questions. This is your chance to find out more about the company. After all, you may have to decide if you want to work there. Some questions you might want to ask include: Who would supervise me? Can you describe a typical assignment? Are there opportunities for advancement? * How do you train employees? What do you like most about working for this company? An interview is not the time to inquire about salary or benefits. You don't want to seem more interested in financial rewards than in contributing to the company. If asked about salary requirements, try to convey flexibility. The best time to discuss earnings is after you have been offered the job. Before leaving the interview, make sure you understand the next step in the hiring process. Find out whether there will be another round of interviews, whether you should provide additional information, and when a hiring decision will be made. Finally, be sure to thank the interviewer. And if you are interested in the job, say so. Other questions: Why is this position available? What are your goals for this position? What type of training programs will be offered to the person in this position? What obstacles must be overcome for the person in this position to succeed? How will my performance be evaluated? What opportunities are there for growth? What growth do you anticipate for the company over the next 12 months? DO'S AND DON'T'S AT INTERVIEWS

Do's Arrive 15 minutes early. Late attendance is unacceptable. Pay attention. Clarify questions. Be sure to answer the questions the interviewer really asks. If you don't understand the question, ask the interviewer to rephrase it. Speak Clearly. Use proper grammar, syntax, and a good vocabulary. Logically organize your thoughts and answers. Make use of non-verbal communication and body language. Exhibit self-confidence. Appear energetic and enthusiastic. Have the interviewer describe the position and responsibilities to you early in the conversation so you can relate your skills and background to the position throughout the interview. Sell your qualifications. Stress the accomplishments that are most relevant to the job. Conduct yourself professionally. Be aware of what your body language is saying. Smile, make eye contact. Don't slouch. Maintain composure. Anticipate tough questions. Prepare in advance so you can turn apparent weaknesses into strengths. Dress appropriately. Make a professional first impression. Ask questions throughout the interview. An interview is not a one-sided conversation. You are interviewing the employer as much as they are interviewing you. Listen. This is one of the most important abilities. By concentrating not only on the employer's words, but also on the tone of voice and body language, you will pick up on the employer's style. You will understand how the employer thinks and can pattern your answers accordingly. This way you will be able to better relate to him or her.

Don'ts Don't answer vague questions. Get the employer to be more specific and then respond. Never interrupt the employer. If you don't have time to listen, neither does the employer. Don't smoke, chew gum or place anything on the employer's desk. Don't be overly familiar, even if the employer is doing all of these things. Don't wear heavy perfume or cologne. Don't ramble. Long answers often make the speaker sound apologetic or indecisive. On the other hand, don't answer questions with a simple "yes" or "no". Explain whenever possible. Do not lie. Answer questions as truthfully as possible. Do not make derogatory remarks about your present or former employers or companies. Don't bring up compensation. Always let the employer bring up money first. NO PANTS REQUIRED: TELEPHONE INTERVIEWS For some interviews, what you wear makes no difference at all. Many employers conduct preliminary interviews over the telephone. This arrangement gives employers an opportunity to find the best prospects before investing time, effort, and, in some cases, expense in arranging a face-to-face interview. Telephone interviews are especially common for jobs that are out of State, attract many applications, or require a good telephone demeanor. A phone interview is similar to a traditional interview, but it poses special challenges. If your phone has a call-waiting feature, consider disabling it the day of the interview. You do not want to put the interviewer on hold, and persistent callwaiting beeps are distracting. Take advantage of being on your home turf by having your resume, pen, paper, appointment calendar, notes, and reminders within easy reach. Remember to speak clearly and listen attentively, just as you would if you were meeting with the interviewer in person. Even though no one can see you, your voice betrays attitudes and confidence; sometimes, sitting up straight can help project enthusiasm over the phone. At the end of the interview, express your willingness to speak with the employer in person. This is important, because most employers prefer to meet with a potential employee face to face before hiring. Guidelines: Express Your Enthusiasm: Convey your interest in and enthusiasm for the company and the position for which you interviewed. Try to be specific about why you are interested and how you are a good fit for the team. Address Unresolved Points: Address any issues or questions that came up during the interview that you feel you did not fully answer. This letter is your last chance to make a positive impression on the interviewer. Personalize It:You will likely be one of many interviewees, so you need to set yourself apart from the other candidates so they will remember you when you leave. In your letter, highlight a key point from your interview that you believe the interviewer will remember, and therefore remember you. Additionally, if you meet with more than one person, consider sending them all thank you letters, each one a bit different; you may not know exactly who in the group will be making the decisions. Getting a business card from each interviewer will help you with names and titles when you sit down to write your thank yous. Reiterate Your Expertise: If the company communicated its specific needs, issues or challenges, use your thank-you letter to demonstrate how you can meet those needs. Highlight Your Successes: Similarly, if the company communicated its ideal qualifications for a candidate, use your thank-you letter to outline how you meet or exceed those qualifications. Proofread, and then Proofread again: Make sure your thank you letter conveys a professional image by ensuring it is free of typos and grammatical errors. SAMPLE THANKYOU NOTE
215 Casandle Drive
Middle Brook, FL 32634

December 15, 2004

Mr. Nigel Adams
Director of Human Resources
Nagata Resorts
6528 Castle Point Street
South Port, FL 38625

Dear Mr. Adams:

I would like to thank you for taking the time to interview me for the position of hotel manager on December 14. I was very impressed with the amount of vacationers that you stay at Nagata Resorts every year.

I appreciate the time that you spent discussing the responsibilities of the position. I believe that my credentials make me an ideal candidate for the position. As I mentioned in my interview with you, I already have 7 years experience as a hotel manager. I am very organized and have a high attention to detail. I also believe that the customer is the most important asset, so I always treat them with the utmost respect.

I look forward to hearing your decision about the position. You can contact me at (555) 555-5555, if you have any further questions, I'd be more than willing to come in and discuss them with you. Thanks again for the opportunity to interview with Nagata Resorts.

Sincerely,

Signature

Chad Ulster FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT THANKYOU NOTES
Doesn't it come off as wimpy or even desperate to send a thank-you letter? Won't the employer think I'm sucking up?
No. It's a very rare employer who isn't pleased to get a thank-you letter. Most consider it just common courtesy, a way to differentiate you from the pack, proof that you're really interested in the position, and a way to keep your name in front of them.

Will a thank-you note make or break my chances of getting a job?
Well, probably not in most cases, but it could. Why take the chance? One of my former students told me that after he was hired for his first job out of college, his boss told him that he had wavered between my student and another finalist for the position. But then the boss got a thank-you letter from my student, and it made all the difference. Because of that simple gesture, my student got the job.

Should it be a typed business letter or a handwritten social note?
Studies show it doesn't matter. The important thing is doing it. Tailor your letter to the culture of the company and the relationship you established with the person who interviewed you. If you feel the interviewer and the company call for a formal business letter, send that. If your rapport with the interviewer dictate a more personal touch, send a handwritten note.

What about an e-mailed thank you?
Career experts are not in total agreement about the propriety of e-mailing a thank you, but again, the company's culture should guide you. If people in the company use e-mail heavily, your e-mailed thank you will seem right in step. It's also a fast solution if you know the company will be making its hiring decision quickly. Even if e-mail fits in with the company culture, however, it's a good idea to follow up your e-mailed thank you with a hard-copy version.

So, if "just do it" is the byword, I don't have to put that much effort into it, right?
Wrong. We've heard of candidates on the verge of being hired getting suddenly discounted from consideration because they sent sloppy, poorly written thank-you letters, riddled with typos, misspellings, and grammatical errors. Writing skills are important in many jobs, and employers don't want to have to teach candidates remedial skills. Spellcheck, proofread, and have someone else read over your letter before you send it.

Can I just borrow a sample thank-you letter from a book and adapt it to my interviewer?
Well, "borrowing" is one thing. In fact we've provided some sample interview thank-you letters to show what thank-you letters should look like. But be sure to borrow just the basic structure, and perhaps a few key phrases; don't plagiarize the whole thing. We know of one employer who instantly recognized that a thank-you letter he received had been taken word for word from a text he was familiar with.

If I interview with several people, do I have to send a thank you to each one?
That's the best approach. You can make it essentially the same letter to each, but vary at least a sentence or two to individualize the letters in case your recipients compare notes.

How soon after your interview should you send a thank-you?
The rule of thumb is to send it within 24 hours of the interview.

Should I bother with a thank-you note if I know the hiring decision will probably be made sooner than I can mail a thank-you letter?
The key word here is "mail." If mail is too slow for the hiring decision, find a faster way: e-mail, fax, air-express, or hand-delivery. In fact, if the interview was local, hand-delivery of the thank-you letter can make a super impression.

What if I do receive an offer faster than I can send a thank you?
Send it anyway to thank the employer for the interview and the offer. Your letter can also accept or decline the offer. An acceptance letter can re-state your understanding or the terms of the offer (salary, benefits, vacations days, starting date, paid training, etc.); that way any discrepancies can be red-flagged by the employer and straightened out before you start.

Is there anything you can do to make an even better impression with your thank you?
Find a way to personalize it. If you notice that the interviewer collects elephant figurines, for example, write your thank-you note on a notecard with an elephant picture on it. Or send a clipping of an article you think the interviewer would be interested in. GENERAL FOLLOW-UP TIPS

Taking the time to follow up with everyone you met with (collecting business cards is a good way to get contact information) and review these tips on how to follow-up after an interview: Follow up after both in-person and phone interviews. Send a personal thank you email to everyone you met with. Email is the fastest way to say thank you. Send your email message as soon as possible after the interview. Consider sending a handwritten thank you note, as well. Keep a box of thank you note cards and a book of stamps handy. Send your note within 24 hours of the interview. Use this opportunity to reiterate your interest in the job and the company. Highlight your relevant skills. Mention anything you wished you had said, but didn't, during the interview. Keep your correspondence short. Proofread your email and notes before you send them. Review sample thank you notes if you're not sure what to write.

Preparation of additional information/documentation.
During the interview, did you offer to put together a rough outline of a marketing idea you discussed? Were you asked to forward your college transcripts? Did you volunteer to send a great article you'd read about manufacturing in rural areas? Be prompt, precise, and proactive in providing additional material that may help support your candidacy. You may cover these materials with a brief handwritten note or your business card with a word or two jotted on the back.

Followup phone calls.
It is perfectly appropriate to follow up with the interviewer after a period of time to determine the status of the position and your candidacy. One of your final questions at the end of your interview might be, "When may I expect to hear from you? May I check back with you in two weeks?" Enter the date in your calendar and follow up as promised.

Continued networking.
A successful networking interview should result in additional contact names. Follow through on all leads, and give occasional status updates to the person who originally referred you.

In all your followup activities, be sure to spell the person's name correctly and use his or her correct title. If you failed to get a business card during the interview, call the person's office to check on the name. It's a simple matter to say, "I'm sending a letter to Mr. Yastrzemski. Would you verify the spelling of his name for me?" You do not need to identify yourself in these calls, but if you enjoyed a friendly chat with a secretary or receptionist, it would be a good idea to call that person directly, identify yourself, and ask for his or her help. This is another way to keep your name and candidacy in the forefront.

Prompt, polite followup is an indicator of good business etiquette and will help to set you apart from candidates who do not follow up. Be sure you do all you can and all you've promised to cement yourself and your candidacy with potential employers. And if you need help with letter writing or have business etiquette questions, drop us an e-mail! We'll be happy to help you shine even after the interview. If you get a letter of rejection, it may be a good idea to turn that letter into a learning tool. Consider the following reasons given by 739 corporate recruiters surveyed by Michigan State University for rejecting candidates and decide if any of them fit you for that particular interview. Unrealistic expectations of first job: won't accept entry level position,
entry level pay Lack of enthusiasm, commitment, interest in job Attitude of "What can you do for me?"; conceited; rude Late; ill-prepared for interview; no research on organization;
asks poor questions Lack of planning for career - no purpose or goals Education or previous work experience has no relevance to job being sought Poor explanation for low grades, and/or bad references; makes excuses;
fails to take responsibility for actions No previous leadership experience or positions of responsibility Poor nonverbal skills; inability to communicate clearly;
shy, lack of self- confidence Poor personal appearance Negative attitude regarding previous employers and/or professors