while the Sonoma Human Services Department's goal is to protect and improve the well-being of the individuals and families who reside in Sonoma County - especially those who cannot protect themselves by providing many different forms of assistance, including employment services, in-home support to aging and disabled individuals, Veteran's services, foster care, food stamps, cash assistance, and eligibility for medical services. In addition to operating the Valley of the Moon Children's Home, an emergency shelter for children who need temporary refuge because of neglect or abuse, they operate 24-hour emergency telephone lines for reporting incidents of suspected child and/or adult abuse. These services, in addition to HSD's partnerships with the community, contribute to the safety and security of thousands of children and families during times of financial hardship or family distress.




Health insurance coverage includes vision and dental insurance coverage but does not include orthodontia coverage.



Healthy Families Insurance

Enrollment in Healthy Families should occur only when no other coverage is available through either parent.

The Healthy Families Program is a state and federal funded health coverage program for children with family income above the level eligible for no cost Medi-Cal and below 200% of the federal income guidelines ($27,300 for a family of three).

An informational handbook and application may be obtained from the DCSS office and for assistance, call the Healthy Families Program at 1-800-880-5305, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., Monday-Friday to obtain the following information:
Information on doctors, clinics, and dentists in your area that are part of the Healthy Families Program; and Get names and addresses of individuals or organizations in your area that are trained to help you fill out the application for free. Get copies of the application Get answers to your questions



Medi-Cal

For information about eligibility for Medi-Cal coverage, contact the Medi-Cal Office at 520 Mendocino Avenue, Santa Rosa, CA 95401, (707) 565-2719.




California Children Services


California Children Services (CCS) program may be able to provide financial assistance for diagnostic and treatment up to the age of 21 years to children who have a catastrophic or serious medical condition. Their Orthodontic services, and occupational and physical therapy are also available.

Applicants must meet medical, financial and residential eligibility guidelines first.

Eligibility Guidelines

Age
Your child must be under 21 years of age.
Residence
Your child must be a permanent resident of the California county where you apply.
Income
Your family income must be less than $40,000 per year, according to the adjusted gross income on your California income taxes. A child whose family has a higher income may receive services if the estimated cost of medical care in one year is expected to exceed 20 percent of the family income.
Medical Condition
CCS covers medical conditions that are physically disabling or require medical, surgical, or rehabilitative services. If CCS thinks that your child might have an eligible condition, CCS will pay for diagnostic services, including examinations, laboratory tests, and X-rays.




The Sonoma County program for the medically indigent is provided through the State's County Medical Services Program (CMSP). This program serves residents who are single, meet Federal poverty guidelines for income, and otherwise are not eligible for medical treatment under MediCal.

ELIGIBILITY:
Individuals ages 21 through 64 who reside in a participating county, have income at or below 200% of the federal poverty level (FPL), and who are not eligible for Medi-Cal benefits


Any changes in your situation that may affect your eligibility must be reported to your eligibility worker. These changes include getting married/divorced, getting or losing a job, getting pregnant, changing your address, as well as any changes to income. If these or any other change occurs you must notify your worker within ten days.
The county will determine which programs you may qualify for if you are a single parent with minor children, have minor children and have become unemployed, receive Social Security Disability, are pregnant, or feel that you are disabled, you should apply for Medi-Cal benefits.

Can I get CMSP for services received before I applied?

No. Your eligibility for CMSP benefits starts with the first day of the month in which you apply for CMSP.

Do you have to be a citizen to receive benefits?

Yes, you must be a United States citizen or have legal immigration status. CMSP county residents with undetermined immigration status may receive restricted emergency services only.The CMSP has established maintenance needs levels depending on the size of your family. These maintenance need levels are specific income amounts that are allowed for your living expenses. Any amount counted over these limits is considered excess and is your Share-of-Cost what you must pay or obligate to pay toward your medical expenses each month before CMSP will pay for services.

What if my property exceeds the requirement limit?

If your property exceeds the limit, you will not be eligible for CMSP. Talk to your eligibility worker at the county social services department for more information about acceptable ways to bring down your excess property.

Are there income or property restrictions?

CMSP has property requirements that must be met to be eligible for program benefits. An individual may only have $2,000 in liquid assets (bank accounts, CD, cash, etc.) during the month. (A home, one car, and personal effects are exempt). Two persons may have $3,000, three $3,150, four $3,300, etc.

What if my income exceeds the requirement limit?

If your net countable income exceeds 200% of the federal poverty level (FPL), you will not be eligible for CMSP. If your net countable income is above the maintenance need level but below 200% FPL, you must pay a certain amount of your medical bills before CMSP will begin to pay.

For example, the maintenance need for one person is $600. If, after certain, limited, amounts are deducted from your gross pay for the month, and your countable net income exceeds $600, that excess amount is your Share-of-Cost. Some of these deductions include health insurance premiums, court ordered child support or alimony, and a $90 standard work deduction. However, if your net countable income is above 200% of the federal poverty level (FPL) you are not eligible for CMSP.

What if I move from my county?

No matter where you move, you will have to reapply for benefits in that county. But you must tell your eligibility worker that you are moving. Only the participating 34 rural counties have CMSP. The other counties have their own county programs, which may be more restrictive in terms of eligibility criteria or where you may receive services.

How do I receive CMSP benefits?

When you go to the doctor, pharmacist, or other medical provider, they will verify your eligibility for CMSP, check if you have a Share-of-Cost and how much is remaining on the Share-of-Cost, and determine if there are other applicable restrictions or limitations.

When the county determines that you are eligible, you will receive an approval notice, and shortly after, a Benefits Identification Card (BIC) -- a plastic card with your name, identification number, and a magnetic strip on it. In addition, beginning October 1, to receive CMSP benefits you will need to go to a CMSP/Anthem Blue Cross network provider to receive all services, except emergency services. If you receive non-emergency services from a medical provider who is not a part of the CMSP/Anthem Blue Cross provider network, you will be responsible for paying for those services. It is your responsibility to present your BIC and your CMSP/Anthem Blue Cross ID cards to the provider when you get services.

What if I disagree with an action the county has taken?

If you disagree with an action the county has taken, you may appeal that action by first discussing the action with your eligibility worker and the eligibility worker supervisor. If you remain dissatisfied, you may request a hearing. If you currently have benefits and request a hearing before the date the action is to take place, your benefits will continue until your appeal has been resolved. The county in which you received your benefits is responsible for conducting the hearing and ruling on the issues.

What else should I know?

You will NOT receive another notice regarding the end date for your benefits because it is your responsibility to reapply for CMSP during the last month of your eligibility term if you would like to continue your CMSP eligibility into another term.Your beginning and end date for your CMSP benefits will be provided to you as a part of the Notice of Action (NOA) you get regarding your eligibility for CMSP.




Child Health and Disability Prevention


The Child Health and Disability Prevention Program provides complete health assessments for the early detection and prevention of disease and disability in children and youth, offered at no cost to families that meet eligibility criteria.

Through the CHDP program, eligible children and youth receive periodic preventive health exams. Preventive health exams can help children stay healthy, find health problems early, and answer many health questions. Children with suspected problems are then referred for diagnosis and treatment. Many health problems can be prevented or corrected, or the severity reduced, by early detection and prompt diagnosis and treatment.

Is my child eligible for CHDP services?

If your child receives Medi-Cal health benefits, they are eligible for the CHDP program. Children whose families meet the program's income guidelines are also eligible. Call the CHDP program at 707-565-4460 or 1-800-427-8982 to learn if your child qualifies.


Who provides CHDP services?

Private physicians, community health centers, and some local school districts provide CHDP health assessments at no charge to income-eligible families throughout Sonoma County. Sonoma County has over 50 CHDP provider offices.


What else does CHDP offer?

Referrals: Parents can connect with a Certified Application Assistor who will help determine which insurance program is best for your child or family.

Outreach and Education: The CHDP program can participate in community events such as health fairs and festivals and provide health educational materials to physician offices. The CHDP program has health information on many topics ranging from nutrition to child safety.

CHDP Gateway: Using an automated pre-enrollment process, the CHDP program is a "Gateway" for over one million uninsured children to the Medi-Cal and Healthy Families health insurance programs.

Health Care Program for Children in Foster Care (HCPCFC): The Sonoma County CHDP program administers this public health nursing program, working with County child welfare services agencies and the probation department to address the medical, dental, mental and developmental needs of children and youth in foster care.




HIV Services

The Center for HIV Prevention and Care helps people maintain and improve their health while coping with the challenges of HIV disease. It is an excellent "first stop" for person's newly testing HIV positive, or who are moving into Sonoma County, and have not not yet linked to a medical provider. Medicare, Medi-Cal and most insurance plans are accepted and has a sliding fee scale available for non-insured people.

The Center can help you organize your medical care and other needed services, including:

Primary medical care for patients and their children Case management Health education Women's health care Nutritional counseling Psychiatric consultation Individual, couples and family counseling School immunizations Medical provider consultation Peer support groups Pharmacy consultation Medication adherence support Prescription drug programs Clinical drug trials Smoking cessation classes

The Center is a resource for HIV medical expertise in Northern California, and helps clients and local medical providers keep abreast of the latest developments in HIV treatments.

If you are new to Sonoma County, and are seeking medical care, contact your HMO, or the following health care centers:

Santa Rosa: Center for HIV Prevention and Care at 707-565-7400
Russian River Area: Russian River Health Center at 707-887-1501
Occidental: Occidental Area Health Center at 707-874-2444

The Center annually updates and distributes a HIV/AIDS Resource Directory for Sonoma County that is available free to persons with HIV/AIDS and their care givers.




Medical Marijuana ID Card Program

The Medical Marijuana Program (MMP) was established by the California Department of Health Services in 2004 to facilitate the registration of qualified patients and their caregivers through a statewide identification system.

Participation in the program is voluntary for patients and the patient's primary caregiver. Through their county of residence, qualified patients and their caregivers may apply for and be issued an identification card. This card is used to verify those patients and caregivers that have authorization to possess, grow, transport and/or use medical marijuana in California.

The Sonoma County Medical Marijuana Identification Card (MMIC) program provides patients with an ID card to show they have a recommendation from their physician to use marijuana for medicinal purposes. The card can assist law enforcement officials in determining whether an individual using marijuana meets the requirements of the Compassionate Use Act, which states that, with the recommendation of a physician, a patient may obtain and use marijuana for personal medical purposes.


At the time of application appointment, you must present:

A completed MMIC application. Proof of residency. Government-issued photo ID. A piece of your medical record that documents that your attending physician has discussed or recommended the use of medical marijuana as part of the patient treatment plan. Your physician's name, address and telephone number. Your current Medi-Cal card if you are a Medi-Cal beneficiary. The MMIC application fee for each card.


Frequently Asked Questions

Who do I contact for information on the Sonoma County Medical Marijuana ID Card (MMIC) program?

Contact the Office of Vital Statistics at 707-565-4442. For all other California county MMIC programs, contact the California Office of County Health Services Medical Marijuana Program.



* Application packets are available at the Office of Vital Statistics, Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Completed applications are accepted by appointment only on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m.



Where do I apply for a MMIC?

The MMIC program for Sonoma County is located at the Office of Vital Statistics at the Public Health offices, 625 5th Street, in Santa Rosa. Application packets can be obtained at Vital Statistics, Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Completed applications are accepted by appointment only on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Call 707-565-4442 to schedule an appointment. Your application fee will be collected and your photo taken when you submit your application.

What information/documentation is required for a MMIC?

The qualified patient needs to provide:

A completed application. A valid government-issued photo ID, such as a current and valid motor vehicle driver's license or identification card issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). This includes the DMV DL43 "Change of Address Certification Card." Proof of residency within Sonoma County. A piece of medical record that documents that your attending physician has discussed or recommended the use of medical marijuana as part of the patient treatment plan. The application fee.
Do I have to be a Sonoma County resident in order to receive a MMIC?

No, any California resident that is a qualified patient can apply for a MMIC; however, you must apply for your MMIC in the county where you reside. Proof of residency is required.

What can I submit as proof of residency?
A current and valid California motor vehicle registration bearing your name and your current residence within the county; or A current and valid motor vehicle driver's license or identification card issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). This includes the DMV DL43 "Change of Address Certification Card;" or A current rent or mortgage receipt or utility bill in your name bearing your current address within the county.
Is a medical marijuana recommendation considered a prescription?

No. Federal law prohibits doctors from writing prescriptions for illegal drugs. Marijuana is not considered legal by the federal government, and federal law still provides that use or possession of marijuana is a crime.

Can my caregiver also obtain a MMIC?

Yes. If you designate a primary caregiver on your application form, your primary caregiver must present photographic identification, and complete Section 4 on the form at the same time you submit your application. The application fee for the caregiver card will be based on the application fee of the patient/applicant.

Can I obtain my recommendation for medical marijuana from an out-of-county physician?

Yes. The attending physician must have a license in good standing issued by the Medical Board of California or the Osteopathic Medical Board of California, but there are no residency requirements for the physician.

Can I have more than one primary caregiver?

Yes, if your primary caregiver is the owner or operator of a facility providing medical care and/or supportive services to a qualified patient. No more than three employees can be designated as "primary caregiver" by the owner or operator.

Can a primary caregiver care for more than one patient at a time?

Yes. However, if an individual has been designated as the primary caregiver by two or more qualified patients, the primary caregiver and all the qualified patients must reside in the same city or county.

Can I have a caregiver who lives out of the county?

Yes. The primary caregiver must prove California residency and is further restricted to being the primary caregiver for only that patient.

Can I be a primary caregiver for a resident of another county?

Yes, but that will restrict you to being the primary caregiver for only that patient.


The primary caregiver, if any, needs to provide:

A completed application. A valid government-issued photo ID, such as a current and valid motor vehicle driver's license or identification card issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). This includes the DMV DL43 "Change of Address Certification Card." Proof of residency within Sonoma County. The application fee.
Your caregiver's photo will be taken at the time of application.

If a qualified patient applies for a MMIC for a primary caregiver, both the primary caregiver and the qualified patient must be present at the time of submission of the primary caregiver's application.

It is the applicant's responsibility to ensure that an authorized release of medical information is on file with their medical provider.
The attending physician will be contacted to confirm that the medical documentation submitted by the patient is a true and correct copy of the attending physician's records. It is the applicant's responsibility to ensure that an authorized release of medical information is on file with their medical provider.


Is my MMIC recognized in other California counties?

Yes. This is a statewide identification card program.

Does a MMIC protect me from all law enforcement?

No. In particular, it does not protect you from federal law enforcement agencies.


What information will appear on the MMIC?

A photo of the cardholder. A unique user identification number issued by The California Office of County Health Services Medical Marijuana Program. The name and telephone number of the county agency that approved the application. A web-based Internet URL that will enable state and local law enforcement officers, the public and others to have immediate access to verify the validity of the card. The expiration date.
What MMIC cardholder personal information is available to anyone (including law enforcement) accessing the MMIC website?

No other information is accessible. When the MMIC unique identification number is entered through the MMIC website, a "valid card" or "invalid card" response is generated.

How long will a MMIC be valid?

If the primary caregiver applies for a card at a later date than the patient's MMIC, the primary caregiver MMIC will have the same expiration date as the patient's MMIC. Qualified patient and primary caregiver cards are valid for one year.

How do I renew my MMIC?

This includes submitting the application form with supporting documentation and paying the appropriate application fee.Renewing a MMIC requires the same process as applying for a new MMIC.

How do I replace my MMIC if it is lost, stolen or damaged?

To replace a lost, stolen or damaged card, the applicant must reapply for a new MMIC and repay the current application fee. The Office of Vital Statistics will notify the California Office of County Health Services Medical Marijuana Program to invalidate the Unique User Identification Number (UUID) on the missing card.


What is the fee for applying for a MMIC?

The current application fee is $160.00. Proof of eligibility and participation in the Medi-Cal program, presented at the time of application, qualifies a Medi-Cal beneficiary to receive a 50% reduction in fees. If the applicant qualifies for this fee reduction and is designating a primary caregiver, the fee for the primary caregiver's application will also be reduced by 50%. Application fees are non-refundable.




Clinic Locations

Chanate Clinic
3420 Chanate Road
Santa Rosa, CA 95404
Phone: 707-565-4820

Directions:

* From Highway 101, exit Bicentennial Way
* Drive East on Bicentennial Way to Mendocino Avenue
* Turn South (right) on Mendocino Avenue to Chanate Road
* Turn East (left) on Chanate Road
* Turn left at the signal to continue on Chanate Road
* Turn right at County Farm Road and follow signs to Chanate Clinic

Riley St. Clinic
418 Riley Street
Santa Rosa, CA 95405
Phone: 707-565-4820

Directions:

* From Highway 101, exit College Avenue
* Drive East on College Avenue to Mendocino Avenue
* Turn South (right) on Mendocino Avenue to 5th Street
* Turn East (left) on 5th Street to Riley Street
* Turn South (left) on Riley Street

*Please note that PARKING IS LIMITED near the Riley Street Clinic. Parking regulations are strictly enforced. Nearby Public Parking garages are located at 5th and Orchard Street, and 7th and Mendocino Avenue.

Russian River Health Center

PO Box 1449
Guerneville, CA 95446
(Corner of Third St and Church)

Main Line: (707) 869-2849
Dental: (707) 869-2933
Mental Health: (707) 869-2961

Chanate Health Center
3320 Chanate Road
Suite C
Santa Rosa, California
(across from Sutter Medical Center)

For an appointment at either clinic,
please call (707) 547-2222

Sonoma Valley Community Health Center

430 W. Napa Street, Ste. F (Use MapQuest)
Sonoma, CA 95476

Phone: (707) 939-6070
Fax: (707) 939-2272
Patricia Talbot


Occidental Area Health Center

3802 Main Street
Occidental, CA 95465

Main Line: (707) 874-2444

Southwest Community Health Center

Lombardi Court
751 Lombardi Court
Suite B
Santa Rosa, California
(across from Roseland US Postal Station)


