The original hotel was a colonial bungalow with ten rooms, located at Beach Road and Bras Basah Road and was owned by an Arab trader, Syed Mohamad Alsagoff . The original location was by the sea, although continued reclamation means that the site is now 500 metres away from the shore. No Asians were permitted as hotel guests until the 1930s. The hotel continued to expand over the years with the addition of wings, a ballroom, a bar and billiards room, a verandah, and further new rooms and buildings. The Great Depression was a difficult time for Raffles Hotel and they went into receivership in 1931. However in 1933 the financial troubles were resolved and a public company called Raffles Hotel Ltd was established.
On the 15th of February 1942 the Japanese occupation of Singapore started and it is said that the Japanese soldiers found the guests of the Raffles Hotel dancing one final waltz. During World War II, the Raffles was renamed Syonan Ryokan. Syonan meaning 'Light of the South' the Japanese name for occupied Singapore, and ryokan which is the Japanese name for a traditional inn. Following the liberation of Singapore over three hundred Japanese soldiers committed suicide in the hotel using grenades. The hotel survived World War II and was used as a transit camp for prisoners of war.
Famous for the unique style of the hotel and the exceptional service, The hotel is close by to some good shopping areas and also the the War Memorial Park. On the 16th of September 2007, the hotel celebrated its 120th anniversary with Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew, who celebrated his 84th birthday on the same day.
is conveniently located for Singapore's business and historic district The hotel has 103 suites, sixteen restaurants and bars that have won awards, with a swimming pool with bar and a gym that is open 24 hours a day, a museum,a playhouse, a shopping arcade, the Raffles Culinary Academy and outside there is are expansive gardens and courtyards. As well as all this there are so many other facilities available when you stay at the Raffles Hotel Singapore. You have access to a 24 hour on call personal valet. There is a business centre you can use. If you have children with you they can attend The Sugar Palm Club for Children. There is an on-site florist, a shop for gourmet food and provisions, and a laundry service. The hotel also has it's own musum, the Raffles Hotel Museum, which showcases the history of the hotel The hotel also has several rooms perfect for your meetings or event. The Ballroom is synonymous with style and luxury. The high ceilings are hung with Austrian chandeliers and the walls feature rich murals of early Singapore. With large arches and french doors the ballroom feels light and airy. The Casuarina Suite is named after a book of short stories called 'The Casuarina Tree' written by Somerset Maugham. Whether you are hosting a meeting or a social event, this tasteful and elegant room is designed for comfort and is brimming with style. The Casuarina Suite can also be divided into two smaller rooms if needed. The Edwardian East India Rooms, located in the oldest part of the hotel is the most formal of all the event areas. It provides the perfect backdrop to any formal occasion. The Lady Sophia Suite is named after Lady Sophia Hull who was the second wife of Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles. This room opens onto beautiful gardens.For an outdoor event there is The Palm Garden This area features a stunning cast-iron fountain from the 1890's. Standing more than six metres high it truly is the focal point of the garden.
If you wish to dine at the Raffle Hotel Singapore, you will certainly be spoilt for choice. At the Raffles Grill you can experience the ultimate in fine dining, with French created by top chef . Here you will receive the famous Raffles personal and discreet service.For a less formal bite to eat there is the Raffles Cafe. A favorite meeting place for artists, business people and shoppers alike. The Cafe offers a wide selection of fine coffees, teas and wines. You can enjoy a light snack and their special cookies. The Tiffin Room serves a curry buffet with traditional Indian and Asian specialities. The Tiffin Room Buffet is available for lunch and dinner. Breakfast and high tea is served daily. This restaurant is very popular with both tourists and locals. Ah Teng's Bakery serves the most tasty pastries, cakes and cookies. You can also sample their delicious hot Dim Sum . This relaxing cafe is the perfect place to have your morning coffee. The Long Bar Steakhouse can be found on the second floor of the Raffles Hotel Arcade, next to the world famous Long Bar. The Long Bar Steakhouse mixes steakhouse dining with nostalgia and the simple flavours of early plantation fare. The two storey Long Bar next door is where the Singapore Sling was invented by bartender Ngiam Tong Boon between 1910 and 1915. The Long Bar is also is said to be where the last surviving wild tiger in Singapore was shot and so became extinct. Raffles own version of the story is that the tiger had escaped from a nearby native show and was chased underneath the hotel's Bar & Billiard Room and shot dead there on the 13th of August 13 1902. The decor is inspired by Malayan plantations of the 1920's. In this bar you'll find just about any alcoholic and non-alcoholic drink you can think of,they also serve traditional pub meals as lunch. or snacks throughout the day. Doc Cheng's award-winning themed restaurant features western cuisine with an Asia twist. The Empress Room Chinese restaurant serves Cantonese food created by a top chef from Hong Kong. Dim Sum is also served at lunchtime. The Bar and Billiard Room serves a continental buffet for lunch on weekdays and a lavish brunch on Sundays. It features two original billiard tables from the turn of the century. Seah Street Deli is a New York-style delicatessen. The menu features American style sandwiches, salads and main course items with friendly service and large portions. Raffles Courtyard with its white arches and tropical palms maintains the feeling of 'Old Singapore' in a tropical open courtyard. Raffles Courtyard features a traditional alfresco kitchen, a colonial cocktail bar, table umbrellas and live music. The Empire cafe is themed like a coffee house of the 1920s and serves both international and local favourite meals. Finally there is the Writer's Bar.This l ocated in the lobby of the Hotel and pays tribute to all the writers who have stayed at the Hotel or written about it.