At present economy, everyone is looking to cut corners, especially on the cost of entertainment because it can be expensive. Luckily, there are websites that allow users to watch TV shows and movies at no cost from your own computer and for just a few minutes of brief advertisements, you can catch up on missed episodes of your favorite shows, revive old memories with television classics and even watch a blockbuster or two.
Many Internet users and people who spend most of their time behind a computer ask, "How do you watch TV on your computer?" Amazingly, there are actually a lot of people who do not know how to do this. It's not that they are not aware of the possibility rather this is a very new technology and for while it seemed difficult to pull off such an activity. To watch satellite TV on PC is a luxury no one would imagine could happen so soon. A few years ago, people started debating about the merits of watching satellite over cable TV. Today, the contention carries on. Let's enter the battlefield of the two major giants and decide for ourselves if there is any clear winner or perhaps to watch satellite TV on PC is the future of TV viewing.
There are two camps of TV viewers, one who are loyal followers of cable or digital TV, while the other group consists of die hard fans of satellite. To be fair, satellite television offers arguably better quality in terms of TV programs. However, cable has an advantage in terms of pricing in most cases. One set back of satellite television is perhaps in its installation. Typically, you would need to install a satellite dish, receiver, etc in order to start receiving TV programs. But this is easily overcome since many satellite service providers also provide free installation as part of the package you subscribe for.

Satellite TV folks would complain about the disruption in the TV reception during storms but cable TV viewers are not spared either. So it seems that this little hiccup is a common problem both camps suffer from occasionally. This more or less levels the playing field.
As they continue to compete in terms of availability of service, quality and variety of TV programs and pricing, satellite TV is fast emerging as the choice of many viewers. Other than normal TV entertainment, it offers you a formidable combination of entertainment, information, movies and traditional channels. You can watch any program from comedy to drama, sports news and science documentaries using satellite. If you prefer to keep abreast with current affairs in your country or international news, satellite television can offer you these programs from hundreds to thousands of worldwide channels. Even your children can be kept occupied with the interesting and educational kids channels.
We have looked at both ways to watch TV. Now, to watch satellite TV on PC is like marrying the two popular ways of TV viewing. All you need is a broadband internet connection, a desktop or laptop and special proprietary software installed onto your PC, and you can watch satellite TV on PC in a matter of minutes. This removes the need for messy installation you have come to associate with traditional satellite dish set up.
Broadband internet connection is rarely disrupted and this also insinuates that TV viewing should be smooth and free from interruptions most of the time. You no longer have to worry about catching up on the missed episode of Prison Break because of a broken transmission. Finally, the cost you are ever going to pay is the one-time purchase of the software used to watch satellite TV on PC.

The truth that more and more people are watching TV and videos on the internet is not surprising anymore, if truth be told, it is still on the rise. Of course, there are more people who watch the regular television and home videos but the existence of internet videos and internet TV are making its viewers catch up in numbers in comparison to the former. If there was once a point that you turned down an offer of installing a TV on your PC that enables the viewer to watch more than a hundred channels from all over the world, now is probably the time to consider its acquisition.
This can be done by purchasing legal and non-fraudulent software so as to avoid possible compatibility issues in the future. TV on your PC entails access to the entertainment brought about by internet television without the hassle of monthly subscription. The software needs be simple, scam-free, risk-free, and true to its promise of delivering quality service to its clientele. This will result in having the consumers need not worry about adware, spyware, or viruses. It also eliminates skepticism. In order to avoid committing mistakes, the basic information about using the said software for internet TV must be taken into consideration.
Get to learn the dynamics and functionalities of TV on your PC. Despite the fact that it offers almost unlimited access to free TV, radio, music, internet, and VOD on your computer, it does not give you the Cable TV or Satellite TV programming. Nevertheless, you will get the next best offer, which is internet TV with qualities such as flexibility, freedom, mobility, savings and television variety. In effect, you don't have to worry about a software that descrambles or decodes purchased-TV signal because it does not. Flaws may be present even on the best Satellite TV for PC software. This remains unnoticed until proven otherwise by the end user. This can also happen when there is no adequate information that may help in the decision-making process before paying the one-time minimal setup fee. The flaws are not being revealed by the seller that is why the offer seems too good to be true. Besides, the fact that a high-speed internet connection is necessary for a TV on your PC to be compatible with a Vista or Windows computer, a better understanding is still necessary.
20% (+ or -) is the probability that it might fail. Why? It might be incompatible with the hardware and the previously installed software on the computer. This is still least likely to happen since 80% (+ or -) is the probability that it will function well. There are a lot of possible solutions to the said issue since they are ruled out before the purchase. In the mean time, you can always try out a simple test before the actual purchase.
Information should be properly and concisely disseminated to make the consumer totally aware of the pros and the cons of using the software for the TV on your PC. Awareness eliminates skepticism. As such, the customer has a better judgment of the purchase to be made. This is made possible by looking at alternative options. Moreover, not all sellers manage their own financial transactions. Information on who or what company processes and handles the transactions is a plus once a refund is needed.
In general, most of the companies that sell these kinds of software are getting the service of third party firms to handle the dirty work, such as financial transactions (e.g. sales, refunds, etc.), for them. Possible reasons for this are the lack of necessary skills and the lack of human resource to do the task. This is valuable information that may be of benefit to the possible buyers of the software. An honest review of the advantages and the disadvantages is the secret to purchasing the appropriate package and software.
The best television experience does not come from fraudulent acts like software piracy or from paying so big that its almost impractical and unworthy. The true television experience nowadays is the acquisition of TV on your PC through the use of reliable software. It gives you faster and easier access to TV, radio, music, internet, and VOD for free. The neophytes have a chance to discover the wonderful advantages for themselves. To see is to believe. Not to mention, the offer includes freebies and perks for better enjoyment of quality entertainment.
The channels on a regular television can probably counted by the fingers that you have on your hands. You are compelled to watch only what is available, and this leads to boredom. When you share the TV with five more members of the family, differences in tastes and preferences leads you to argue about what programs to watch. The above mentioned problems may be lessened, or even eliminated, by a leading TV on your PC that comes with legal software.

Watching television and movies online is not only free--it is also legal. According to Gregory Karp of the Chicago Tribune in his article "Watching TV Solely on Computers is Possible," "Full-length TV shows are available on the Internet, supported by short commercials"
Some TV broadcasts are accessible directly via the Internet and no connection to a television is required. Those who own Digital Video Recorders (DVR) may also prefer to connect their computer to the DVR rather than the television directly. Since a few years ago, people have been able to watch satellite TV on computer by installing the PCTV cards. Such PCTV cards are basically computer hardware used to receive satellite TV channels and convert to viewable programs. The cards come as either external device plugged onto your computer or fixed directly onto your motherboard in your computer. These cards are not exactly cheap and can be priced in the range of hundreds of dollars for a quality branded card. Ever since PC satellite TV software appeared, it has readily replaced this PCTV method to watch satellite TV on computer. After installation, the software enables your computer to function like a satellite television and you can start to watch thousands of worldwide satellite TV and radio stations on PC.
To watch satellite TV on computer with PC satellite TV software is catching on fast in the homes of developed countries especially USA, UK, Australia and Canada where the people spend many hours glued to their TV sets. There are several clear benefits to watch satellite TV on computer which we are going to discuss here.
Satellite television is basically television programming that is delivered to viewers through communications satellites in space. This presents a tremendous opportunity to service providers as well as viewers when compared to the conventional way of getting TV, like through cab services. Satellite television is not only an answer for people who want more television programming, but it is also a solution for people who can't get cable television in certain areas. This is especially helpful if one wants to watch TV but only has access to a computer with an Internet connection.
More Advantages - There are advantages to watching television on the computer and of them is the simultaneous activity of enjoying TV and the Internet all on the same platform. Not everybody has a TV that can access the Internet but a lot of people have a computer and access to the Internet which is why satellite TV on the computer is just a perfect solution. Average satellite TV services deliver not more than 200 satellite TV channels to their subscribers. Even with that number of programs, the quality of the TV programs is not always good and there are some channels which people hardly have any interest in. This is not the case with PC satellite TV software as it allows you to tune into thousands of global satellite TV stations to watch satellite TV on computer. Software users have reported that they can easily find TV channels showing programs like cartoons, videos, world news, sports events and games, latest released movies and TV shows. In short, you can definitely find a program you love to watch.It costs no more than $50 to buy the PC satellite TV software used to watch satellite TV on computer. This is the biggest difference between using PC satellite TV software and satellite TV services. Once you own the satellite TV software, you are not required to fork out an extra dollar for the TV programs. Satellite TV services would normally charge you additional costs if you wish to watch some non-featured channels or LIVE sports broadcasts. If you use PC satellite TV software, this is free. This is yet another striking difference when using PC satellite TV software to watch TV on your PC. Compared to cable, it's affordable. How do you watch TV on your computer and for even less money spent? Satellite TV on the computer is probably the only solution for that problem. Cable television can be very expensive because one has to pay a monthly subscription to be able to enjoy it all the time. But with satellite television streaming straight to the computer, all one really needs is an installed software that will handle the TV streams. This is a program that one can buy from various providers on the Internet but after that, there are no more monthly fees to pay which means that TV is now virtually free.
If you are looking for the best solution to your viewing habits, satellite TV streaming straight to your desktop or laptop is the best one.

More Options - The other advantage of watching satellite TV on the computer is that anybody who has this kind of software can gain access to 3000 channels from all around the world. This is regardless of location as long as a person has the right software and access to the Internet, like through WIFI hot spots in public places.
View Anywhere - This leads to an even further advantage where people who used to rely on TV viewing at home. With satellite TV on the computer, a person can be as mobile as he or she wants to be. This is especially helpful for those who travel a lot on business or even those on vacation who want access to world entertainment. The conventional method of using satellite dish to watch satellite TV can suffer from interferences in places where weather conditions can be harsh. It is a norm for the TV reception to be affected by weather and therefore, the TV picture quality is weak and fuzzy. There could be intermittent stoppages when you are watching your TV. This is most upsetting but unavoidable. But when you watch satellite TV on computer using software, this problem does not exist. Viewing quality of the satellite TV on PC far exceeds that of the satellite dish system in this aspect.
These are tangible advantages to watch satellite TV on computer with software. More and more people who see the affordability and versatility of the software have decided to ditch traditional satellite TV dish systems and services for PC satellite TV software. TV enthusiasts all welcome the change which of course includes me who is now able to catch a movie or watch my favorite TV news channel on PC.

The technology to watch TV on computer has been around for years, but over the past five years or so the trend has really taken off. There are three reasons why the popularity of watching TV on computer is skyrocketing:
1. High-speed broadband Internet access is giving millions of people access to computer TV, where before they only had a slow dial-up connection that could barely stream audio files, much less watch TV on their computer.
2. Over the past five or six years, computer screens have vastly improved in quality, and gotten much larger. A medium-range home computer now features a flat-screen monitor that would've put most television sets to shame just five or six years ago! Because of this, the quality available when you watch TV on computer is now excellent.
3. The popularity of online video sites such as YouTube, MetaCafe and others has increased the public's appetite for watching TV entertainment on their computer. The "YouTube generation" is perfectly comfortable with online video, and many would rather watch TV on computer than with an "old-fashioned" TV set.


Televisions do not normally support Ethernet cable connections. Instead, you will typically connect your laptop or desktop PC to a TV using one of the following types of audio-visual (AV) cables:
S-Video HDMI DVI or HDMI-to-DVI VGA Any of the above - to-SCART (in Europe)
A scan converter is a device that translates the computer's video signal into standard TV formats. You may need to set up a scan converter to connect your computer and TV if, between them, the two do not support any compatible combination of AV cable technologies listed above. Newer televisions, however, generally support multiple types of digital inputs, and finding the right cable should not be too difficult.

How to share images between a laptop (or desktop) PC and the television
Wireless / Networking One way to show digital pictures and video to friends and family is for all to huddle around the home computer screen. Alternatively, you can connect the computer to a television and send the images to the TV. Technology also exists to network a TV and a computer in the other direction, so that you can watch television programs on your laptop or PC. Each method involves pros and cons including some setup challenges. Displaying Digital Images on The TV
With a digital camera or video recorder, you can create multimedia image files stored on your PCs. Showing these images to others can be inconvenient, however, especially if your computer screen is small and located in a private room of the house. Displaying them on a television usually allows you to show them at a larger size and in a more comfortable location.You can connect a computer to a TV either wireless or with cables. The best method to choose depends on the types of connections your TV supports as well as your budget for purchasing additional hardware.
Connecting Computers to TVs Wirelessly
As an alternative to using cables, you can also use Wi-Fi to connect computers and TVs wirelessly. Because televisions do not ordinarily support Wi-Fi, you will need to install a separate unit between the computer and TV. One common solution is called a Wireless PC to TV system or Digital Media Receiver. These products connect via AV cable to the TV and supply Wi-Fi connections to any computer in the home. Another wireless PC to TV connectivity option is based on Windows Media Center Edition (MCE). If you purchase a Windows XP or Windows Vista PC with the MCE application included, this system contains built in wireless connectivity support for streaming images to your television. Some of these systems also support TV tuner cards that allow your computer to receive incoming television signals. Finally, you can extend the capability of a Media Center PC across an entire wireless home network by installing a Media Center Extender product like the LInksys DMA2100.
Pros and Cons of Connecting Computers and TVs
Networking your computers and TVs provides the most convenient sharing of multimedia images: does not require connecting a digital camcorder or camera to the TV can make the necessary connections with either Windows, Mac or Linux computers with Media Center Extender or similar capability, can direct content from any home computer to the TV
You may also encounter a few challenges and limitations:
the screen resolution of older TVs is much lower than modern computer displays - your images and video may appear with lower quality when shown on the television when using AV cables, you may need to relocate the laptop or PC very close to the television to reach when using wireless connections, the effective range may be relatively short, depending on the equipment in use, due to the high volume of data involved in digital media hardware needed, especially the more advanced wireless gear, may be expensive to purchase
Once you have found a TV show or movie you want to watch you can view it on your computer through your computers media player. If you do not have the necessary software installed on your computer, don't worry! The website will usually direct you to a page where you can download the correct plug-in or software to play media on the Internet.
Viewing free TV shows and movies online legally on your computer seems like a great alternative to paying for cable or downloading shows from paid sites. But, before you cancel that cable subscription package there are some pros and cons to consider:
Access only the TV shows and movies you are interested in viewing and leave the rest. You can rewind, pause and restart as much as you need to - unlike watching a show on cable. If you had been tempted to download a show through other means - these options might just change your mind!
Not everything can be found online. Also, as Karp notes in his Tribune article, there are often delays with networks loading shows onto the air or even deleting shows from their servers. You may not be able to enjoy a show again and again. If you didn't get to finish watching it and it was removed from the server - you can't catch the rerun. Unless you've done a lot of tweaking to set your computer up only to watch free online TV shows and movies your computer is also doing a lot of other things besides buffering your shows! Slowdowns, delays, sound quality and the like may all interfere with the viewing experience.

TVSA235USB - World Wide Shipping Available
Overview | Features | System Requirements | Purchase

NTSC (Taiwan, United States), NTSC (Japan), PAL (Europe & Australia). Delivering your power presentation with 1024 x 768 high-resolution dual display for Windows and Mac computers.
It is an ideal teaching and meeting display utility and is the perfect device for playing your favorite video files on your home TV. Create a slideshow on your PC with PhotoStage and play it directly to your TV.

Support NTSC & PAL Multi-TV System Mac and PC or Notebook Compatible (MAC VGA Connector is not included in this package.) No software needed, but connect the PC with TV directly Highest resolution is 1024 x 768 @ 75Hz Adjustable display: screen position, brightness, contrast, definition and tone AV and S-Video signal input and output simultaneously No extra power adapter necessary: empowered by USB 2.0 Interface Support the power saving mode of DPMS that is compatible with display card Secure Purchase
Resolution Refresh Rate 640 x 480 60 / 72 / 75 / 85 Hz 800 x 600 60 / 72 / 75 / 85 Hz 1024 x 768 60 / 72 / 75 / 85 Hz

Video Output: AV, S-Video, VGA Output

Windows XP SP2, Pentium III or Athlon XP 1GHz Mac OS X G4 1.5GHz or Dual Core 1.6GHz USB 2.0 port 512MB RAM USB Power Cable VGA Cable S-Video Cable AV Cable User Manual

TVATSC330U - North America Only
Overview | Features | System Requirments | Purchase

Watch live high quality digital 1080i format HD TV without service fees from anywhere on your laptop, the options are unlimited with full support for both analog (NTSC) and digital (ATSC) reception. * ATSC HD is the over-the-air high definition TV standard for North America.

Pocket Sized and Easy to Install
To install, just plug it into your PC or laptops USB 2.0 port and connect a cable or an antenna. Load the software from our installation CD and you're ready to start. TV On the Go
HD Hybrid Stick also includes a portable digital antenna, so you can receive digital TV while you travel Secure Purchase 30-Day Money Back Guarantee

High speed USB2.0 Plug-and-Play interface for PC or Laptop. Watch HDTV programs (ATSC) or Analog (NTSC) TV programs on your PC or Laptop. Supports up to 1920x1080i (HDTV). Compatible with WindowsMediaCenter Supports Dolby Digital AC3 Audio Output. Includes an additional AV/S Video input for connecting other video sources. (such as DVD Player/ VCD/ VHS/ Camcorder). ArcSoft TotalMedia Software: User-Friendly interface with powerful functions Supports Time-Shifting and Scheduled Recording function. Performs auto Channel Scan and Name Recognition. Supports internet EPG (Electronic Program Guide) for analog TV in USA. Supports Real-time video recording in MPEG-2 format. Captures analog and digital Images in JPEG/BMP/TIF/PNG format. Edits the Video and Photo files with simplified operation. Creates beautiful slide show presentations for work or fun. Supports Closed Captioning Burns video files into DVD/VCD
For ArcSoft TotalMedia Center, Time-Shifting and Recording Microsoft Windows XP SP2 / XP MCE 2005 / Vista with Microsoft DirectX 9.0c Intel Pentium-IV 3.0 GHz or higher (Recommended) 512 MB RAM of system memory or above (Recommended) USB 2.0 Compliant Slot Graphics Card with DX-VA feature (Recommended for HDTV) Sound Card (AC97 compatible sound card 1 GB free HD space CD-ROM Drive (For software installation) Outdoor Antenna TV connection for ATSC; Outdoor antenna/cable TV connection for Analog TV For Microsoft Windows Media Center, Time-shifting and Recording Windows XP MCE 2005 / Vista Premium above Intel Pentium IV 3.0GHz or equivalent AMD CPU or higher DDR400 1024MB RAM of system memory or above USB 2.0 Compliant Slot Graphics Card (Windows XP MCE 2005 certificated / Windows Vista certificated) Sound Card must compatible with Windows Vista Free HD space for Time-Shifting (e.g.To record 1 hour of programs into MPEG2 files will approximately occupy 1.8GB)

TVANA305 - World Wide Shipping Available
Overview | Features | System Requirments | Purchase

Turn your PC into a TV set and personal video recorder instantly with a USB TV analog stick. This device supports worldwide analog TV systems; you are also able to enjoy live TV anywhere, anytime with your laptop computer and PlusTV analog stick.
The PlusTV analog stick supports Time-Shifting functionality; you can leave your favorite show to pick up a phone call, and continue where you left when you come back. If you have to work late and your favorite TV show is on, just set a schedule to record with the scheduled-recording function.

The PlusTV analog stick uses USB 2.0 interfaceand is plug-and-play. You'll be up and running in an instant.

Works on XP and Vista
Both the hardware and software that come with this great package are certified for Windows Vista.

USB 2.0 Plug-and-Play interface Worldwide analog TV reception from cable/air TV TV Receiving Frequency 55.25 855.25 MHz (NTSC) / 48.25 863.25 MHz (PAL) MicrosoftWindows Vista tested and approved (software and hardware) HyperMedia Center : User-Friendly interface with powerful functions: Enhanced 16:9 Wide-Format Display Auto Channel Scan Multiple Channel Preview Supports Time-Shifting and Scheduled-Recording function Supports real-time video recording Supports Still Image capture in BMP format
For HyperMedia Center Center, Time-Shifting and Recording Microsoft Windows XP SP2 / XP MCE 2005 / Vista Intel Pentium-IV 2.0 GHz or equivalent AMD CPU or higher 256 MB RAM of system memory or above (Recommended) USB 1.0 Compliant Slot Graphics Card with 64MB memory (Must support DirectX 9.0c) Sound Card (AC97 compatible sound card) 2 GB free HD space CD-ROM Drive (For software installation) For Microsoft Windows Media Center, Time-shifting and Recording Windows XP MCE 2005 / Vista Premium above Intel Pentium IV 3.0GHz or equivalent AMD CPU or higher DDR400 1024MB RAM of system memory or above USB 2.0 Compliant Slot Graphics Card (Windows XP MCE 2005 certificated / Windows Vista certificated) Sound Card must compatible with Windows Vista Free HD space for Time-Shifting (e.g. To record 1 hour of Mpeg 2 File will occupy approximately 1.8GB) CD-ROM Drive (For Driver installation)
Easy Plug-and-Play USB2.0 interface
KWorld PlusTV analog stick uses USB 2.0 interface. It's just like using your memory stick, plug-and-play.

You can Watch and Record Live Analog TV on Your Computer andTurn your PC into a TV set and personal video recorder instantly with Kworld PlusTV analog stick because it supports worldwide analog TV systems. You can as well enjoy live TV anywhere, anytime with your laptop computer and KWorld PlusTV analog stick. y

USB 2.0 Plug-and-Play interface. Worldwide analog TV systems support. Hyper Media Center: User-Friendly interface with powerful functions. Enhanced 16:9 Wide-Format Display. Auto Channel Scan. Multiple Channel Preview. Supports Time-Shifting and Scheduled-Recording function. Supports real-time video recording in MPEG-2/1 format. Supports Still Image capture in JPEG or BMP format. Additional multimedia software included. MPEG Converter. MPEG Editor. Burn DVD.

Interface: USB2.0 interface. Video Input: TV Input - 75 Ohm (UHF/VHF) TV Antenna. TV Receiving Frequency: 55.25 - 855.25 MHz (NTSC). 48.25 - 863.25 MHz (PAL). Dimension: 93mm(L) X 28.5mm(W) X 19mm(H).

Intel Pentium IV, 1.6GHz or equivalent AMD Athlon. 256MB RAM of system memory or above. 1 available USB 2.0 port. Graphics Card (Must Support DirectX 9.0). Sound Card (AC97 Compatible Sound Card). 1GB Free HD Space. CD-ROM Drive (For software installation). Microsoft Windows XP SP2 / XP.

PVR-TV 350U. Quick Start Guide. Installation CD.