Although it is not located in the geographic center of the District of Columbia, the US Capitol is the focus by which the quadrants of the district have been divided. Curiously, the west face, which is generally taken to be the "front" of the building, is in fact its "back" and the true front is the east face.

At present, the underground tunnels and an underground railway connect the main Capitol building with each Congressional office building in the surrounding complex. All rooms in the Capitol have been designated as either S - for Senate or H - for House, depending on their location with respect to the Rotunda. Similarly, rooms in the Congressional office buildings have been designated as HOB which stands for House Office Building, which are located to the south of the Capitol or SOB which stands for Senate Office Building, which are located to the north of the Capitol. Moreover, each and every addresses in Washington, D. C. has been designated NE, NW, SE, or SW with respect to the to the Rotunda. AS the Capitol Rotunda is not in the center of the District, the four D.C. quadrants do not have the same shape and size.

Since 2001, East Front of the Capitol which was the site of most of the Presidential Inaugurations until Ronald Reagan broke this tradition in the year1981, has been the site of construction for massive underground complex, which has been designed to facilitate an orderly entrance for the visitors to the Capitol. Once construction is complete, the East Front will be restored to its earlier appearance. Prior to this, visitors to the US Capitol had to queue on the parking lot to ascend the stairs. After this the entry was made through massive sculpted Columbus Doors, through a small narthex that had cramped security and then directly to the Rotunda. The new underground facility will be able to provide a grand entrance hall, a visitors' theater, exhibition room, dining and restroom facilities. This will be apart from the space for building necessities such like an underground service tunnel.


Grounds

The Capitol Grounds cover almost 274 acres with the grounds proper that consists mostly of lawns, streets, drives, walkways and planting areas. The present grounds were designed by noted American landscape architect named, Frederick Law Olmsted, who had planned the expansion and landscaping that was performed from 1874 to 1892. In 1875, Olmsted proposed construction of the marble terraces on the north, west and south sides of the building as one of his first recommendations, that exist even today.

Olmstead had also designed the Summer House, the open-air brick building that is located just north of the Capitol. Three arches open into a hexagonal structure. This encloses a fountain along with twenty-two brick chairs. The fourth wall holds a small window and it looks onto an artificial grotto. Built between 1879 and 1881, the purpose of the Summer House was to answer complaints that the visitors to the Capitol had no place to sit and they also had no place to obtain water for their horses or for themselves. Modern drinking fountains have replaced Olmsted's fountain for the latter purpose. Olmsted had also intended to build a matching Summer House on the southern side of the Capitol and due to the Congressional objections the project was cancelled.
Up to four US flags can be seen flying over the US Capitol. Two flagpoles are located at the base of the dome on the East as well as the West front. These flagpoles have flown the US flag day and night ever since World War I. The other two flagpoles are located above the North and South wings of the building and these two flags fly only when the chamber below is in session. The flag located above the House of Representatives is raised or lowered by pages. A number of auxiliary flagpoles located on the west of the dome which are invisible from the ground, are used for meeting Members' requests for flags that are flown over the Capitol. Constituents of the Members of Congress pay in order to have a US flag flown over the Capitol for a short duration to commemorate a variety of events like death of a veteran family member, birthday, etc.

The Committee System - Due to its high volume and complexity of work, the Senate has divided its tasks among twenty committees, sixty eight subcommittees and four joint committees. The Senate committee system is quite similar to that of the House of Representatives, but it has its own guidelines and each committee adopts its own rules within these guidelines. This creates a considerable variation in different panels.

Here are some of the Committees:
1. Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
2. Appropriations
3. Armed Services
4. Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
5. Budget
6. Commerce, Science, and Transportation
7. Energy and Natural Resources
8. Environment and Public Works
9. Finance
10. Foreign Relations
11. Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
12. Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
13. Judiciary
14. Rules and Administration
15. Small Business and Entrepreneurship
16. Veterans' Affairs
17. Indian Affairs
18. Select Committee on Ethics
19. Select Committee on Intelligence
20. Special Committee on Aging
21. Joint Committee on Printing
22. Joint Committee on Taxation
23. Joint Committee on the Library
24. Joint Economic Committee

The US Senate Caucuses - Informal congressional groups and organizations of various Members with common interests in specific issues or philosophies have been a part of the policy making process since colonial times. These groups organize themselves without any official recognition by the chamber and are these are not funded through the appropriation process.

Within the Senate, there is one caucus that is officially recognized. It is "The Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control" and it was established by law in the year 1985.



Contact details of the Caucus

Caucus on International Narcotics Control
Hart Senate Office Building
Room 818-C
Washington, DC 20510
(202)-224-9032



Security

In 1954, Puerto Rican nationalists opened fire on the members of Congress from the visitors gallery. In 1971, a bomb exploded on the ground floor. It was placed by a new left group that was called the Weather Underground or Weatherman. The bomb was placed as a mark of demonstration against the involvement of US in Laos. In November 1983, the John Brown Anti-Klan Committee claimed responsibility for a bomb that was detonated in the lobby outside the office of Senate Minority Leader Robert Byrd. In July 1998, Russell Eugene Weston Jr. burst into the US Capitol and opened fire. AS a result, two United States Capitol Police officers were killed.

It is believed that the Capitol was an intended target of the hijacked United Airlines Flight 93 on September 11, 2001. The plane crashed in Somerset County, Pennsylvania after its passengers tried to take over control from the hijackers. Since the September 11, 2001 attacks, the roads and also the grounds around the Capitol building have undergone considerable changes.

Construction is well underway on an underground, three level, US Capitol Visitor Center by the east face of the Capitol. The project had long been in its planning stages, but the attacks provided the impetus to start this work. Construction began in the fall of 2001.As a result of this, the security is expected to be enhanced. This will be possible by directing all the public visitors through the center. Critics say that the security improvements have been the least of this project's expense. As a matter of fact, the construction delays and added features by the Congress continue to add to its cost. However most of the people, including those who work in the US Capitol, consider it as an appropriate historical project. This project will mainly be underground and skylights will provide views of the Capitol dome.

Checkpoints have been installed by the United States Capitol Police to inspect vehicles at specific locations around the Capitol Hill. These have closed a section of one street indefinitely. The level of screening employed varies according to the requirement. On the main east-west thoroughfares of the Constitution and Independence Avenues, barricades have been implanted in the roads and these can can be raised in case of an emergency. Trucks, which are larger than pickups have been interdicted by the Capitol Police and these are instructed to use other routes. On checkpoints located at the shorter cross streets, the barriers have been kept in a permanent emergency position, and only those vehicles which have special permits are allowed to pass.

Structures ranging from Jersey barriers to ornamental bollards have been erected for obstructing the path of any vehicles that may stray from the designated roadways. Each poles has costed $7,500.

Major events

The body of the former President Ronald Reagan has been lying in state in the Rotunda. The Capitol and the grounds of Capitol Hill, have played host to a number of events. Since 1990, every year people gather on the west lawn on the Sunday before Memorial Day for the National Memorial Day Concert which is broadcast on PBS.


On every July 4, people gather on Capitol Hill in order to celebrate Independence Day.

Here are some of the major events that the Capitol has hosted:

Presidential inaugurations
These Americans are lying in state.
Senator Henry Clay -1852. He was the first person to lie in state at the Capitol.
President Abraham Lincoln - 1865
Representative Thaddeus Stevens - 1868
President James Garfield - 1881
President William McKinley - 1901
President Warren Harding - 1923
President and Chief Justice William Howard Taft - 1930
President John F. Kennedy - 1963
General Douglas MacArthur - 1964
President Herbert Hoover - 1964
President Dwight Eisenhower - 1969
Senator Everett Dirksen - 1969
Director of the FBI J. Edgar Hoover - 1972
President Lyndon Johnson - 1973
Vice-President Hubert Humphrey - 1978
Representative Claude Pepper - 1989
President Ronald Reagan - 2004
President Gerald Ford - 2006-07

These Americans are lying in honor:

Officers Jacob Chestnut and John Gibson - These two officers were killed in the 1998 shooting incident. As a matter of fact, Chestnut was the first African American ever to lie in honor in the US Capitol.
Civil rights icon Rosa Parks (2005) - She was the first woman and second African American to lie in honor in the US Capitol.

