The Declaration of Independence of the United States is a very known and powerful statement which was adopted by the Continental Congress of the state on July 4, 1776. The declaration announced that the thirteen American colonies which were then at war with Great Britain were now being proclaimed as independent states. Thus, the thirteen colonies were no longer a part of the British Empire. The declaration was primarily written by Thomas Jefferson. This Declaration provides a formal explanation to answer why Congress of the United States decided to vote on July 2 to declare independence from Great Britain. The time was a year after the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War. Ever July 4 of each year, he birthday of the United States of America Independence Day is being celebrated by the entire nation.

After having finalized the text of the declaration on July 4, the Congress issued the Declaration of Independence in several media. The declaration was initially published as printed in broadsheets. In this way, it was widely distributed and read to the public. The most famous and popular version of the Declaration was a signed copy which can be found on the display at the National Archives in Washington D.D. This copy is what is being called as Declaration of Independence, by the people. As most historians say, the Congress signed this document just on August 2, 1776, and not on July 4, as what is often believed by the public and other people from all over the world.

Scholars have always tried to figure out the sources and possible interpretations of the Declaration of Independence. The Declaration justified and provided for the independence of the United States by listing colonial grievances against King George III. The scholars also mentioned that the Declaration helped in the assertion of certain natural rights. These rights included a right of revolution when the people are nto satisfied with the system of governance subordinating them. Having served its original purpose in announcing independence, the text of the Declaration was initially ignored by the people after the spread of the American Revolution in the country. The stature and belief by the people on the Declaration of Independence was able to grow over the years. The most significant part of the declaration was the second sentence which has been interpreted as a sweeping statement of human rights:

"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these areLife, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness

The president worked on the draft while attending to other duties that his official role entailed. Jefferson was able to complete his draft of the declaration of independence in a few days. He argued in the opening two paragraphs that a group of people had the right to overthrow and revolt against their government when it abused their fundamental and inherent natural rights over a long period of time. This is because this act by the government betrays the trust of the people that is initially given. Then in a direct attack on King George of Britain, Jefferson put and listed 20 instances when the king violated the natural rights of the American colonists which led them dissatisfied with the form of governance. Having thoroughly laid out his proof by several arguments and evidence that the king was a "tyrant" who was "unfit to be the ruler of a people," Jefferson continued on to condemn the British people and the way that these people manage the colonies. Jefferson believed that the British system was oppressive and did not allow the growth of the Americans by advocating equality. "These unfeeling brethren," he wrote, had reelected members of Parliament who had conspired with the tyrant king to destroy the rights of the colonists. Jefferson ended his draft of the declaration of independence by stating, "we do assert and declare these colonies to be free and independent states. . . ."

When Thomas Jefferson submitted his proposed draft to the Congress of the United States on June 28, the delegates spent little time on the opening paragraphs of the draft, which today are the most famous parts of the Declaration of Independence. Instead, the men in Congress concentrated on Jefferson's list of grievances against King George and the British people.

The delegates of the Congress made some small changes to improve the Declaration's clarity and accuracy so that it will be more understandable to the people. The Congress also ripped apart the last sections of the draft prepared by Jefferson, deleting about 25 percent of the entire written piece. The members of the Congress eliminated most of his harsh language directed against the British people and totally remove Jefferson's passionate assault on slavery and the slave trade.

The removal of the section on slavery which was Jefferson's last grievance against the king probably resulted from objections ad protests done by Southern slave-holding delegates. However, the argument by Jefferson was weakened when he blamed the king alone for continuing the slave trade and then condemned him for offering freedom to slaves who joined the British in fighting the American rebels.



The constitutional and legal status of the Declaration of Independence is curiously ambiguous and not really certain. John Hancock (in his capacity as president of the Second Continental Congress) and James Madison both considered the Declaration of Independence to be, in Madison 's words, the fundamental Act of Union of the States. Reflecting that view regarding the declaration, Congress has placed it at the head of the United States Code, under the caption, The Organic Laws of the United States of America. The Supreme Court has infrequently accorded it binding legal force, for example, in resolving questions of alienage ( Inglis v. Trustees of Sailor's Snug Harbour , 1830). Yet lawyers generally, and the Supreme Court in particular, have been reluctant to treat the Declaration as part of American organic law, or even to accord it the restricted status of the Preamble to the Constitution. Conservatives like Daniel Webster denied that there is a constitutionally recognized right of revolution, and those state supreme courts that have addressed the issue in the twentieth century have adopted Webster's view. Reformers, such as antebellum abolitionists, insisted that the Declaration was part of the constitutional order, while their opponents, including John C. Calhoun, denigrated its authority and validity. The adoption of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments allayed the urgency of that question by incorporating concepts of equality, freedom, and citizenship into the operative constitutional text.
The constitutional and legal status of the Declaration of Independence is curiously ambiguous and not really certain. John Hancock (in his capacity as president of the Second Continental Congress) and James Madison both considered the Declaration of Independence to be, in Madison 's words, the fundamental Act of Union of the States. Reflecting that view regarding the declaration, Congress has placed it at the head of the United States Code, under the label, The Organic Laws of the United States of America. The Supreme Court has seldom accorded it binding legal force, for example, in resolving questions of alienage ( Inglis v. Trustees of Sailor's Snug Harbour , 1830). Without a certain and absolute binding force, it would still be legal if a Supreme Court decision would go against the principle of equality accorded by the Declaration of Independence. Yet lawyers generally, and the Supreme Court in particular, have been reluctant and not supportive in treating the Declaration as part of American organic law, or even to accord it the restricted status of the Preamble to the Constitution. Conservatives like the very famous Daniel Webster denied that there is a constitutionally recognized right of revolution, and those state supreme courts that have addressed the issue in the twentieth century have adopted Webster's view. conservatives would prefer to tolerate the existing status quo instead of supporting a revolution to topple the government. Reformers, such as antebellum abolitionists, insisted that the Declaration was part of the constitutional order, while their opponents, including John C. Calhoun, denigrated its authority and validity. The adoption of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments recognized the urgency of that question by incorporating concepts of equality, freedom, and citizenship into the operative constitutional text.