It is an unusual planet as it has some unusual features. Its planetary axis is on a sideways tilt and its magnetic field does not emanate from the center of the planet. This is unique to Uranus. Uranus is pretty unique and stands apart from other planets in the Solar System.

Uranus was discovered on March 13th 1781 by William Herschel, a British astronomer. expanding the known boundaries of the solar system for the first time in modern history. This was also the first discovery of a planet made using a telescope . the father of Kronos (Saturn) and grandfather of Zeus (Jupiter). Uranus is the only planet in the Solar System to be named after a Greek god, the others, other than Earth, are named after Roman gods. Uranus has a circumference of 160,592 kilometers and a radius of 25,559 kilometers which is four times that of the Earth. The s urface area of Uranus is 8.11 billion square kilometers,15.9 times that of Earth, and it has a mass 14.4 times greater than Earth 's weighing in at 8.68x10 25 kilograms. Its a verage distance from the Sun is 2.87 billion kilometers. Uranus has 27 known moons in its orbit, and it has a faint system of planetary rings. Seen from the Earth, Uranus's rings can sometimes appear to circle the planet like a target and its moons revolve around it like the hands of a clock. Uranus is the furthest away planet that is visible from Earth without a telescope Though you can see it with the naked eye Uranus was not referred to as a planet by ancient observers because of it is not bright and has a slow orbit.

The atmosphere consists of 82.5 percent Hydrogen, 15.2 percent Helium and trace amounts of Hydrogen Deuteride. Uranus is similar in composition to Neptune, and both have different compositions from the larger gas giants Jupiter and Saturn. Because of this they are sometimes called the "ice giants". Uranus's atmosphere, while being composed primarily of hydrogen and helium, contains a higher proportion of ices such as water, ammonia and methane. It is the coldest planet in the Solar System, with a minimum temperature of 224 C. It has a layered cloud structure and it is thought that makes up the lower clouds, and methane the upper clouds.The interior of Uranus is mainly made of ices and rocks.

Signs of seasonal change and increased weather activity have been observed in recent years as Uranus approached its equinox. The wind speeds on Uranus can reach 250 meters per second (560 mph).

Before it was discovered to be a planet Uranus had been observed on many occasions, but it was usually mistaken for a star. The earliest recorded sighting was in 1690. John Flamsteed spotted the planet at least six times and catalogued it as 34 Tauri. The French astronomer, Pierre Lemonnier, also spotted Uranus at least twelve times between 1750 and 1769 and once recorded observing it on four nights in a row.

William Herschel was in his garden in New King Street in Bath (his house is now a museum of Astronomy) when he observed the planet in the March of 1781. However he first reported the planet as a comet in the April of the same year.

When William Herschel told Nevil Maskelyne, the Astronomer Royal, about his new discovery of what he believed to be a comet, he received a reply stating that he thought it was most likely to be a regular planet moving in an orbit nearly circular to the sun as it did not have a tail to it.

Herschel was cautiously and carried on describing his new find as a comet, however several other astronomers also started to think it could actually be a planet too. Johann Elert Bode of Germany stated that its nearly circular orbit was more like that of a planet than a comet and Anders Johan Lexell of Russia estimated its distance was eighteen times the distance of the Sun from the Earth. This was important as there had not yet been a comet observed even as far away as four times the distance of the Earth from the Sun. By 1783 Herschel agreed that his discovery was in fact a planet.

Herschel was given the task of taking his newly discovered and decided to name the it Georgium Sidus (George's Star) in honour of King George III. However this name was unpopular outside of Britain so an alternative was needed. One suggestion was that the planet be named Herschel after its discoverer. However it was Bode who chose the name Uranus, after the Greek god of the sky Ouranos.

Uranus, also known as Ouranos was the first son of Gaia who was the earth. Uranus later married Gaia. Their children included the Titans, six sons named Oceanus, Coeus, Crius, Hyperion, Iapetus and Cronus and six daughters named Theia, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe and Tethys. They also had the Cyclopes, the one eyed giants,named Brontes, Steropes and Arges and three monsters known as the Hecatonchires, who each had one hundred hands and fifty heads who were called Briareus, Cottus and Gyes. Other children of Uranus and Gaia were the Erinyes, spirits of punishment and goddesses of vengeance who avenged wrongs which were done within families. Uranus was castrated and his blood fell to earth which was Gaia and this caused her to conceive the Giants, monsters with great strength. Aphrodite is also thought to have risen from the foam created by the sex organs of Uranus when they were thrown into the sea by his son Cronus.

Uranus's offspring horrified him. He hid away those with monstrous appearances in Tartarus (the bowels of the earth) inside Gaia which caused her great pain.Because of this she asked her son Cronus, to castrate his father to stop his fertility so no more monsters could be conceived. Gaia made an adamantine sickle for Cronus and that night when Uranus went to bed with Gaia, he cut off Uranus's genitals with the sickle. When the blood fell, nymphs and giant were born.

There is a complicated planetary ring system around Uranus. They are made of dark particles that measure from micrometers to a fraction of a meter. So far 13 rings have been observed. All but two of the rings are very narrow, just a few kilometres across.Evidence suggests that the rings did not form along with Uranus but may once have been part of one or more moons that have been shattered as a result of an impact at high velocity.

In 1789 Herschel described a possible ring around Uranus, although this is thought to be fairly unlikely, as the rings are so faint to see. No one observed them at all in the next two centuries. However, his description of the ring was actually fairly accurate - its angle relative to the Earth, the red color and the apparent changes as Uranus travels around the Sun. The ring system was officially discovered by James L. Elliot, Edward W. Dunham, and Douglas J. Mink using the Kuiper Airborne Observatory in March 1977. The astronomers had planned to use the occultation of the star SAO 158687 by Uranus to study the atmosphere on Uranus, but when they analyzed their observations, it was found that the star had disappeared out of view five times for a short period of time before and after it went behind the planet. They decided from this that there must be a ring system around the planet. They then went on to discover four morel rings. In 1986 Voyager 2 discovered another two rings, making 11 in total by that point. Then in December 2005 the Hubble Telescope detected another 2 rings. Hubble also detected two small satellites, of which one, Mab, shares its orbit with the outermost newly discovered ring. In 2006 the Keck Observatory produced images of the new rings which showed the colours of them as being blue and red. One idea regarding the outer ring's blue colour is that it is perhaps made up of tiny particles of water ice from the surface of Mab that are small enough to scatter blue light.

Uranus itself rotates fully in 17 hours, 14 minutes. It has very strong winds in the direction of rotation, so some visible features of the atmosphere move much faster, making a full rotation in just 14 hours. Once every eighty four years Uranus completes a full revolution around the Sun. It is approximately 3 billion km from the Sun and the sunlight on Uranus is about 1/400 the intensity of that on Earth. Discrepancies were noticed between the predicted and observed orbits, and in 1841, John Couch Adams proposed that that might be the result of gravitational pull from another unseen planet. In 1845, Urbain Le Verrier researched this in 1845, and in September 1846, Johann Gottfried Galle discovered this was actually the case. There was another planet, which would later be named Neptune that had an impact on the orbit of Uranus.

Unusually, the axis of rotation lies on its side, with an axial tilt of 97.77 degrees. Around the time of Uranian solstices, one pole faces the Sun continuously while the other pole faces away. There is only a small strip around the equator which has a rapid day and night cycle. This has the Sun very low over the horizon similar to conditions in the Earth's polar regions. At the other side of Uranus's orbit the orientation of the poles towards the Sun is the opposite. Each pole gets around 42 years of continuous sunlight, followed by a 42 year period of darkness. Around the time of the equinoxes, the Sun faces the equator of Uranus which results in a period of day and night cycles similar to those seen on most of the other planets.

This strange orientation of the axis of Uranus results in the polar regions getting a larger input of solar energy than the equator. Uranus is still hotter at its equator than at its poles though. No one has yet to discover quite why this is the case. It is also not known why the planet has this unusual axis, but it has been speculated is that it was caused by a collision with another planet when the Solar System was formed. A planet the size of Earth colliding with Uranus could potentially cause this phenomena. Uranus's magnetosphere contains charged proton and electron particles with a small amount of H2+ ions The ion and electron energies can be as high as 4 and 1.2 megaelectronvolts.The particle population is affected by the Uranian moons that pass through the magnetosphere.The particle flux is high enough to cause a darkening of the moon s surfaces on a relatively rapid timescale of 100,000 years. Uranus has well developed aurorae, bright arcs around both magnetic poles. Unlike Jupiter's aurorae, Uranus's do not seem to be significant for the energy balance of the planetary thermosphere.

Until Voyager 2 visited Uranus there were no measurements of the magnetosphere. Previously astronomers had thought that the magnetic field of Uranus would be in line with the solar windand it would then align with the planet's poles. Voyager 2 discovered that the magnetic field is rather odd because it does not originate from the planet's geometric center, and also because it is tilted at 59 from the axis of rotation. The magnetic dipole is shifted from the center of the planet towards the south rotational pole by as much as one third of the planetary radius resulting in a highly asymmetric magnetosphere with a magnetic field strength on the surface in the southern hemisphere that can be as low as 0.1 gauss, but in the northern hemisphere it can be as high as 1.1 gauss. The average field at the surface is 0.23 gauss. To put this in perspective, the magnetic field of Earth is similar at both poles, and the magnetic equator is more or less parallel with the geographical equator. The dipole moment of Uranus is 50 times that of Earth. Interestingly Neptune also has a tilted, displaced magnetic field suggesting that this may perhaps be a feature of ice giants. Uranus's magnetotail trails behind the planet into space for millions of kilometers and is twisted into a long corkscrew by the sideways rotation of the planet.

Between the years of 1995 and 2006 the visible magnitude of Uranus was between +5.6 and +5.9 which made it placing it just visible to the naked eye. The atmosphere of Uranus is quite different from the composition of Uranus as a whole, mainly consisting of helium and molecular hydrogen and helium. Methane is the next most abundant aspect of the Uranus atmosphere. It is the Methane that makes Uranus appear cyan in color.

The troposphere is the lowest and densest part of the atmosphere and is characterized by a decrease in temperature with altitude. The temperature drops from around 320 K at the base of the troposphere at 300 km to 53 K at around 50 km.The temperatures in the coldest upper region of the troposphere, which is called the tropopause, varybetween 49 and 57 K depending on latitude.The tropopause region is responsible for most of the planet's far infrared thermal emissions and from this we can determine an effective temperature of 59.1 0.3 K.

The troposphere is a very dynamic part of the atmosphere with strong winds, bright clouds and seasonal changes and is thought to have a very complicated structure of clouds with water clouds that are thought to be in the pressure range of 50 to 100 bar,ammonium hydrosulfide clouds in the range of 20 to 40 bar, ammonia or hydrogen sulfide clouds at between 3 and 10 bar and thin methane clouds at 1 to 2 bar T.

In the stratosphere, the middle layer of the atmosphere, the heating is caused by absorption of solar UV and IR radiation by methane and hydrocarbons that form in this part of the atmosphere as a result of methane photolysis . Heat is conducted from the hot thermosphere too. Ethane and acetylene tend to condense in the colder lower part of stratosphere and tropopause below 10 mBar level forming haze layers that may be responsible for the dull appearance of Uranus but the concentration of hydrocarbons in the Uranian stratosphere above the haze is significantly lower than in the stratospheres of the other giant planets . . The most abundant hydrocarbons are methane, acetylene and ethane with mixing ratios of aprox 10 7 relative to hydrogen . The hydrocarbons occupy a narrow layer at altitudes of between 100 and 280 km corresponding to a pressure range of 10 to 0.1 m bar and temperatures of between 75 and 170 K. The mixing ratio of carbon monoxide is similar at these altitudes. The abundance ratio of water is around 7 10 9.

The outermost layer of the Uranian, the thermosphere and corona has a temperature of about 800 K. . The thermosphere corona contains a large amount of free hydrogen atoms. Their small mass along with these high temperatures explains why the corona extends up to 50 000 km from the planet which is a unique feature of Uranus. Its effects include a drag on small particles orbiting Uranus, causing a general depletion of dust in the Uranian rings.The Uranian thermosphere along with the upper part of the stratosphere, corresponds to the ionosphere of Uranus.The ionosphere occupies altitudes from 2 000 to 10 000 km, is denser than that of Neptune and Saturn and is mainly sustained by solar UV radiation. Its density depends on solar activity rather than Auroral activity

Uranus least massive of the giant planets with a mass of approximately 14.5 times that of the Earth. it has a density of 1.27 g/cm making it the second least dense planet, after Saturn. Because Uranus has a diameter bigger than that of Neptune, but it has less mass, it indicates that it is made mostly of ices.

consists of three layers. a central rock core,, amiddle mantle of ice, and an outer gas envelope. The core is thought to be fairly small, the mantle is thought to make up the bulk of the planet, and the upper atmosphere is relatively insubstantial. The core density of Uranus is around 9 g/cm and it has a central pressure of 8 million bars. The temperature at the core is thought to be about 5000 K The ice mantle is not made of ice as we would imagine it, but is in fact composed of a hot, dense fluid mixture of water, ammonia and other volatile substances.This fluid is highly electrically conductive and is referred to as water ammonia ocean.

The internal heat of Uranus is significantly lower than the other giant planets and We now know Uranus has at least 27 moons butbefore the planet was visited by the spacecraft Voyager 2 in January of 1986, astronomers knew of only five moons. Voyager 2 discovered ten further small moons orbiting Uranus, and even more have beendiscovered since then. Even now astronomers believe that there may well be more small satellites hidden among the planet's rings that have yet to be discovered.

The moons of Uranus are really spectacular compared to the moons of other planets. They have towering great mountains that reach into the sky more than ten miles high.There are also massive deep valleys and vast plains, some of which have a mysterious and as yet unexplained dark surface. The diameters of these moons range from a little over 25 miles up to around 1,100 miles.They circle Uranus in orbits ranging from every eight hours to every 14 days.

They have been named after characters from Shakespeare and Alexander Pope . The main satellites are Titania, Oberon, Miranda, Ariel and Umbriel. Titania is the largest satellites and has a radius of o 788.9 km making Titania the eighth largest moon in our Solar System. The moons are roughly fifty percent ice and fifty percent rock. Ariel appears to have the youngest surface with the fewest impact craters Miranda has canyons that are twenty kilometers deep. The past geologic activity on Miranda is thought to have been driven by tidal heating at a time when its orbit was different to how it is now. The surface of Miranda has regions of broken terrain suggesting intense geological activity. There are vast canyons visible. The ridges are probably extensional tilt blocks. The large grooved structures, called coronae , may have formed via extensional processes at the tops of diapirs or upwellings of warm ice. The canyons most likely represent grabens formed by extensional faulting . The other features could be caused by cryovolcanic eruptions of icy magma. The diapirs may have changed the density distribution within the moon, which could have caused Miranda to reorient itself. Miranda is one of the few bodies in the solar system in which the equatorial circumference is shorter than the pole-to-pole circumference which is likely to have been caused by the diapir activity.

NASA's Voyager 2 visited Uranus in 1986, it came within 81500 kilometers of the planet's cloudtops, before moving on to Neptune. Voyager 2 studied the structure and chemical composition of the atmosphere and discovered ten new moons. The unique weather conditions were studied and also the ring system among other things.

There are two Voyager spacecraft on a long explorative journey through space, paying special attention to the gas giants of the outer solar system, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.Before Voyager, only the inner planets had been photographed and explored in any great detail. Jupiter and Saturn had been briefly surveyed by two Pioneer probes, and Uranus and Neptune were simply spots of light through a telescope.

In 1977 the large outer planets were aligned in their orbits around the Sun so that by using the gravitational field of one planet to catapult it on to the next, a spacecraft could be launched to pass by all four planets on a mission that would last twelve years or more.

Voyagers 1 and 2 left Earth in September and August of 1977. They arrived at Jupiter in 1979 and discovered an entirely unknown ring around the middle of the planet as well as a large amounts of hurricanes on the planet, and = volcanoes on the moon Io.

The Voyager mission then moved on to Saturn in 1980 and 1981. The planet's ring system was discovered to be far more complicated than had previously been thought.

At this point Voyager 1 was sent out of the solar system. Voyager 1 still had a useful part to play though as engineers on Earth had the spacecraft photograph the tiny image of distant Uranus so they could calibrate the planet's brightness at different sun angles to aid Voyager 2 in its approach to Uranus.

Radio communications have been very important for the Voyager mission. There are massive antennae in Spain, Australia, and California, and they pick up the spacecraft's radio signal. Without this system, nothing from Voyager would be conveyed back to Earth For the closest approach to Uranus, which lasts only a few hours, this network is supplemented by an extra 64-meter antenna at the Parkes Radio Observatory in Australia.

The radio signal from Uranus is almost two billion miles away and so is very faint that by the time it reaches Earth. The antennas struggle to tune in to this very weak signal against the natural background levels of radio noise. At the relatively close distances of Jupiter and Saturn, this was not much of a problem, but as far away as Uranus, the transmission rate has to be lower so that the ground-based receivers can determine what is signal and what is noise.

Photographs need a lot of data, and so the engineers have had to come up with a method of lowering the data rates without having to compromise on the quality of the photographs. They developed a technique of data compression whereby the Voyager photos that made up of an array of pixels, that would normally be assigned an absolute numerical brightness value using eight bits of data, are compressed when it comes to receiving data from Uranus, with each pixel simply being compared to the one next to it, resulting in a single number, and fewer total bits of data.

Voyager is equipped with its own nuclear power supply and a computer that has certain decision making capacities that can operate without human intervention or command. It is also fitted with a large dish antenna for sending data back to Earth, and also for engineers to send instructions to the on board computer.

The spacecraft contains a wide array of scientific instruments, the antenna also serves as a science instrument at encounter time. When Voyager passes behind a planetary atmosphere or ring system, radio signals are beamed back through the atmosphere or rings to send information about their thickness and density.

Below the antenna are the spacecraft's three sets of twin computers. These control the spacecraft's pointing, keep time with a master clock, and schedule events sent via radio signal from engineers on Earth.

Projecting at various angles from Voyager are long arms called science booms. These hold instruments away from the spacecraft body. The longest of which holds a magnetometer, which surveys magnetic fields. Another boom holds a scan platform with cameras on wide angle and narrow angle TV, infrared, and ultraviolet spectrometers, and a light-sensing photopolarimeter.

Other instruments to detect energetic particles are located either on the science boom or on the spacecraft body. Finally, there is another boom that holds Voyager's three nuclear-powered thermoelectric generators.

During the past decade, many bright spots have been seen on Uranus in both red and near-infrared filters, But in 2006 the first dark spot ever was observed. Looking back over images from Hubble it was discovered that the dark spot had been there two months previously.

These observations also showed a bright spot to the north of the dark spot, however in enlarged images of the region the spots do not appear to be connected.

Small bright spots have been seen on Uranus before, possibly thunderheads rising up into the atmosphere. This new dark spot, may perhaps be caused by a thinning of the underlying methane "stratus" layer.

During the next few years, as Uranus passes through equinox, Hubble and ground-based telescopes worldwide will be paying extra attention to Uranus.