Jax Chemical Company

As an sculptor of cast art, I sometimes find it hard to find exactly what I'm looking for when creating the images of my mind. My friends have the same problem. Which is why, when I found not one, but two great sources of inspiration and materials, I could hardly wait to tell you all about it here on my blog.
The first source is a source of inspiration; not necessarily something that most artists lack. I'm not sure which writer claimed to get his ideas from a P.O.Box service when someone asked him where he got his ideas from, but I love the wit and sarcasm in his answer: ideas are everywhere. You don't have to go out and get them -- for the most part, they lie in wait in dark corners and mug you on your way past. (A bit like the English language rifling the pockets of other languages for spare vocabulary.)
Even so, it's always fun to see what dreams other artists dream, and how they realise them. It's inspiring and fascinating and, at times, a bit scary. You have to watch out -- you might get mugged by an Idea!
That's why I am willing to heartily recommend Sculpture Journal magazine. I'm even willing to accept their claim that they are the premier magazine for cast art
And if you go to their website, you can get their Internet Exclusive offer of a free issue mailed to you! So you don't even have to lay down money to see how great it is.
Once you a subscriber to Sculpture Journal magazine -- and I'm sure you will -- you will enjoy informative and entertaining articles on cast art. And they really are on subjects that sculptors want, including: casting bronze, aluminum, iron, steel, glass, and life casting. Their are stories on artists, along with photographs of their art, (my favourite section), foundries that cast art and fabricate using technologies in lost wax, direct burn-out, solid investment, cold cast and ceramic shell. Everything from making armatures, mold-making, pouring waxes, burn-out, pouring metal, chasing, and applying patinas, to mounting sculpture bases. You can read interviews with successful artists and how they price, market and sell their work, as well as obtaining commissions both public and private. And last, but certainly not least, you'll find where products and services are available for everything sculpture related. This is worth the price of subscription alone.
No other sculpture publication in the world offers such a hands-on, realistic, down-to-earth approach to sculpture and cast art as Sculpture Journal. Their writers are on assignment all over the country. They're listening. Watching. Learning. All for you.
And it shows. These are not just everyday shmoes grinding text for a living; they love art, they love learning, and they love sharing what they've learned.
Start your subscription online today, and you can look forward to a new year of sculpture discovery, and know that you are up-to-date with all the latest information regarding cast art.
And what, concrete and vital, information did I learn from the pages of Sculpture Journal? Only a one stop shop for all your patina and finishes needs.
JAX Chemical Company
I'll say that again, in case you missed it. JAX Chemical Company has been manufacturing metal finishing and polishing solutions for over 40 years. JAX Chemicals are used in the lighting, furniture, decorative hardware and stained glass industries. Artisans and craftsmen rely on JAX for restorations, reproductions and current work. And now, I understand why. And why JAX is specified by architects and builders for interiors, exteriors and roofs. Not that I even produce any of those mundane items. But for what I do produce -- create -- JAX products are easy to use and produce authentic, consistent results.
In short: JAX Metal Finishing and Polishing Solutions: Produce authentic, consistent results Are safe and easy to use Require no heat or electricity React within seconds Are non-flammable Are water-based Are fully guaranteed And what products do they supply?
It's not a long list, but it does cover -- almost --everything a cast art artist needs. Colorants
Green Patina
Gold Finish
Antique Rust Darkeners
Brown
Brown-Black
Black
Flemish Gray-Black Blackeners
Pewter Black
Silver Blackener
Iron Steel & Nickel Blackener
Aluminum Blackener
Dichroic FX Black Plating Solutions
Silver Plating Solution
Copper Plating Solution

Cleaning Solutions
Instant Brass & Copper Cleaner
Instant Silver Cleaner
Brass, Copper, Gold and Marble Cleaner
Aluminum Cleaner
Rust Remover
Lacquer Remover
Brass, Copper and Gold Cleaner Finishing Solutions
Rust Preventer
Tarnish Preventer

Polishing Solutions
Silver Cleaner & Polish
Metal Cleaner & Polish
I haven't used all of their products, yet, but here are more detailed descriptions of all of them -- as if you can't figure out what each one is, and what you might use it for.
Colorants Green Patina Does exactly what it says on the tin. It can be used on copper, brass, and bronze to produce a perfect, permanent and authentic patina finish. Comes in five sizes: 2oz, pint, quart, gallon, and -- presumably for the aforementioned roofers -- a 5-gallon cube.
Gold Finish For a 24-carat gold finish on brass, choose from one of four sizes. Guess which of the above sizes this gold finish does not come in.
Wrong, it is in fact available in a 5-gallon cube. It is not available by the quart, leaving you with a choice of 2oz, pint, gallon, and the 5-gallon cube.
It is, however, classed as a hazardous material by UPS, so be aware that extra shipping charges do apply. In most cases, though, if you're buying the smaller sizes -- up to a pint, as far as I can tell -- then you're free of the extra charges.
Antique Rust This one, I bought the 5-gallon cube for. Must quicker way of rusting a ton of twisted iron and steel than lugging it out of my workshop and leaving it in the middle of the street, waiting for a suitable downpour. And the neighbours preferred it, too. Comes in all five sizes: 2oz, pint, quart, gallon, and 5-gallon cube.
Darkeners All the following darkeners are UPS classed hazardous material, so shipping charges apply if you're buying the larger quantities. Brown Use on brass, bronze, and copper for an antique brown finish. Four sizes. Again, it's the quart jug that's not available, leaving 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube.
Brown-Black As above, but darker, more aged. Somehow, a little more authentic. In general, though, if you're not sure which colour to get, brown or brown-black, go for the brown. You can always add a second coat if it's not dark enough. Comes in four sizes: 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube.
Black And black. Four sizes: 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube. I haven't bought this one, but I presume it's just as effecting as the previous two, just darker.
Flemish Gray-Black What exactly is Flemish gray? you ask. No idea, but this worked wonders with a little paperweight I was messing with. Comes in the four sizes: 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube. I got the pint to play with.
Blackeners Pewter Black Four sizes: 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube. Hazardous material. Gives a dark black antique finish to the whole list of pewter, lead, brass, bronze, copper, nickel, tin-lead alloys, and solders. This is another one that might be worth getting the 5-gallon cube for.
Silver Blackener Same as above -- four sizes, hazardous material -- but it gives a black tarnish to silver and, if you must, gold. Even though gold doesn't tarnish. Go figure.
Iron Steel & Nickel Blackener Work on, as it says, iron, steel and nickel. Four sizes: 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube and shipping charged hazardous material.
Aluminum Blackener Another metal that does not, easily tarnish, but you can make it do so with this, if it suits your dreams. Four sizes (2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube) and hazardous material.
Dichroic FX Black Now, this one was fun. Give your brass a dichroic black effect without heat or electricity. Same four sizes as above (2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube), but this one is not classed as a hazardous material by UPS.
Plating Solutions Silver Plating Solution Different sizes! This one comes in 2oz, 4oz, half-pint, and pint! Mind you, you are buying pure silver to plate copper, bronze, brass, and silver(! -- according to their website) without heat or electricity. Not hazardous.
Copper Plating Solution Back to the omnipresent four standard sizes: 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube for this one. Use it to plate copper onto iron, steel, brass, bronze, and solders. Again, without heat or electricity. It is, however, hazardous material according to the UPS.
Cleaning Solutions There are a few of these. Most come in the standard four sizes: 2oz, pint, gallon, and 5-gallon cube, and most are hazardous materials with extra shipping charges. Exceptions apply, and I'll mention them, instead of listing the standard refrain over and again. Instant Brass & Copper Cleaner For brass and copper, obviously, and already we're at one of the exceptions. Comes in only three sizes -- 2oz, pint, and gallon -- and is only classed as hazardous if you buy the gallon drum. Use this to remove tarnish and oxidation from copper, brass, and bronze.
Instant Silver Cleaner Cleans silver. I used it for highlights on one of my blackest silver pieces, and the result was startling. All the oxidation and tarnish was gone, and only where I wanted it gone. The sculpture is stunning, if I do say so myself.
Brass, Copper, Gold and Marble Cleaner I don't work in marble, so I can't vouch for its effectiveness there, but it cleans away surface dirt, grease, old lacquer, and tarnish from brass, bronze, gold, and copper. I can only assume its just as good on the stone.
Comes in the five sizes -- 2oz, pint, quart, gallon, and 5-gallon cube -- and is not hazardous at any size.
Aluminum Cleaner Give your aluminum a shine with this, apparently. Aluminum is another material I don't generally work with.
Rust Remover If, for some reason I can't fathom, you don't want rust on your iron and steel artwork, use this to remove it. Apparently, it is also an effective pre-paint primer, for the true heathens among you.
Lacquer Remover This is a water based solution, (which for all of that is still classed as hazardous by the UPS,) that you can use to strip lacquer and paint from all metal surfaces. Imagine my evil grin, cackling, and rubbing of hands as I order a 5-gallon cube.
Brass, Copper and Gold Cleaner Another cleaner, this one for delicate metals, that removes tarnish and surface contamination. Can be used on fine gold finishes, bronzes, lamps, lighting fixtures, jewelry, and even antiques, because it's not abrasive and leaves no residue. Not something I need, so I'm only assuming it lives up to their clams. It's another one that comes in all five sizes, (2oz, pint, quart, gallon, and 5-gallon cube,) and is not hazardous.
Finishing Solutions Rust Preventer A water based, non hazardous solution that comes in all five sizes: 2oz, pint, quart, gallon, and 5-gallon cube. Useful for coating steel and iron, so it doesn't rust.
Tarnish Preventer Same as above, though it's not available by the 5-gallon cube, for keeping your bronze, brass, and copper tarnish free.
Polishing Solutions Silver Cleaner & Polish Only available by the pint or 2oz, this non-hazardous solution can be used to clean and polish even the blackest silver in one go. It does not strip the surface, so you don't get that raw, dull finish, and the special polish is designed not to harm or streak delicate surfaces.
Metal Cleaner & Polish And last, but by no means least, this cleaner does the same and the one above, but for tarnished brass, bronze, copper, pewter, nickel and steel. It removes oxidation, surface dirt, oil, and fingerprints.
Seen anything you like?
They have a real address, if you want to contact them: 640 South Fulton Avenue Mt. Vernon, NY 10550 TEL (914) 668-1818 FAX (914) 668-8490
But the best part is, you can buy everything I've listed online, and they'll ship it right out to you.
JAX orders are normally shipped via UPS ground. But remember, since many JAX products are considered hazardous under 49 CFR, so UPS charges $20 for each package containing hazardous materials, regardless of quantity. In other words, the hazardous material charge is the same for the one pint and the one 5-gallon container.
This is, remember, in addition to the normal UPS shipping rate.
Larger orders may be shipped by a common carrier of the customer's choice. Hazardous materials cannot be shipped by the United States Postal Service and cannot be shipped to a post office box. So you need a real address if you want any of them. That may be a downside, but I'm sure it's not a new restriction to anyone here, and not one you haven't overcome before.
So, all that is left is for me to assure everyone that I am not affiliated with either of today's recommendations in any way, and to once again urge you all to take a good look at both of them. They may save your bacon.
Or they may not. Why would you want to save your bacon indefinitely, anyway? It would just get rindy and rancid.