The Yellowstone National Park is one of the most popular national park in the US, attracting visitors all year around.

It was once termed a 'Wonderland' by John Muir and a 'Temple of the Living God' by the men who worked diligently to set it aside as a national park.

Located in the states of Idaho, Montana and Wyoming , it features multiple natural wonders. The geysers, hot springs, forests, wilderness, wildlife as well as a grand canyon and a large lake provide endless opportunities for touristic activities. B ackpacking, mountaineering, kayaking, fishing, or simple sightseeing, watching bison, moose, and elk in this wonderful park make memorable experiences for the visitors.

The name Yellowstone originated from the yellow rocks seen in the Grand Canyon of the park. The canyon itself was formed by floods during previous ice ages and b y river e rosion from the Yellowstone River.

The Yellowstone park is considered to be one the largest temperate zone ecosystems in the planet, with a wide variety of flowers and other plant life. It serves as a natural habitat to many wild animals (grizzly bears, wolves), moose and elk, and also to more than 200 kinds of birds.

The once endangered trumpeter swan and the only continuously wild herd of bison in the country is also located here. The Yellowstone National Park is a designated biosphere reserve since 1976 and in 1978 it was recognized as a World Heritage Site .

While beautiful, Yellowstone National Park is one of the most geologically active sites in the U.S.

It is located over a hot spot under the North American tectonic plate and holds a potentially explosive super-volcano that has the ability to cause deadly consequences on the North American continent. History of Yellowstone National Park

Yellowstone was a hunting and fishing territory of the Native Americans for hundreds of years. The first recorded visit by a white person was one by John Colter, a trapper, in 1807. Later, in the 1860s several exploring parties arrived to gather information about this land. One of them was the so-called Washburn-Langford-Doane expedition in 1870. Cornelius Hedges, a Massachusetts-born Montana judge, was a member of this expedition. Although not all historians agree with this statement, but he is generally thought to have proposed the declaration of Yellowstone as a national park. The Yellowstone National Park Act itself was drawn up by several people: William H. Clagett, a Montana territorial delegate in Congress; Nathaniel Langford, territorial revenue collector and later first park superintendent; and Ferdinand V. Hayden, a member of the U.S. Geological Survey. Hayden visited the park in 1871 and was enamoured by the landscape, of which he produced numerous photographs and drawings. His illustrations were utilized to support the proposal, which the congress eventually accepted. Between 1886 and 1916 the park was under military stewardship then the National Park Service (founded in 1916) was put in charge for its maintenance and operation.

Yellowstone's volcano was once thought to be an extinct, dormant system until Jagger recognized activity in 1922. In the 1960's R. Christiansen discovered and described the calderas and the corresponding eruption history of the system. In 1970 researchers noticed that the caldera floor had risen 80 centimeters since the first measurements were taken in the 1920's. Since then more ground deformation has been noted. Subsidence began in 1985 and continued until uplift began in 1995. By 1997 the entire caldera floor was rising. The activity from 1997 until 2002 revealed evidence of the inner workings of the system and the two resurgent domes were discovered, Sour Creek and Mallard Lake (Wicks, 2006). These changes were proof that this was indeed not a dormant system but instead an active magmatic chamber of which we need a much better understanding.
Geography


On a high plateau 8000 feet above sea level, surrounded by mountain ranges of the Middle Rocky Mountains (the Gallatin Range, Beartooth Mountains, Absaroka Mountains, Southern Absaroka Mountains, Teton Mountains and the Madison Range,

Yellowstone remains the largest national park in the contiguous United States.

The plateau features a summit (Mount Washburn at 10,243 feet) and a very large calder a with a lake. The Yellowstone caldera measures about 40 miles long by about 30 miles wide. It contains

most of the Yellowstone Lake (the largest high elevation lake in North America with its 137 square miles) and two resurgent domes (areas that are uplifting at a slightly faster rate than the rest of the plateau).

From the lake, t he Yellowstone River starts its 671-mile journey to the Missouri River, creating the famous 1,200-foot deep Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone River. On its way it is interrupted by two spectacular falls: Upper Falls and Lower Falls. The Lower Falls is almost twice as high as Niagara Falls, dropping 308 feet. The g eothermal features are also one of the major characteristics of the Yellowstone park. The more prominent geysers are unequaled in size, power, and variety. Old Faithful, the best known although not the largest, erupts every 40 to 70 min and shoots c.11,000 gal (41,640 liters) of water some 150 ft (46 m) high. Mammoth Hot Springs, a series of five terraces with reflecting pools, continues to grow as residue from the mineral-rich water is dep osited. The park also contains the largest geyser in the world, Steamboat Geyser. Three thousand hot springs and two hundred geysers decorate the landscape. Yellowstone Park has the largest concentration of geothermal features in the world, about 62% of the the world's total.


The area, a huge craterlike volcanic basin (caldera), is a geological hot spot and the site of several massive eruptions. This hot spot used to be near what is no w Boise, Idaho, bu t North America has drifted at a rate of 4.5 centimetres a year in a south western direction, shifting the hot spot to its present location and making the Yellowstone Caldera the largest volcanic system in North America.

During its creation by a cataclysmic eruption 640,000 years ago 1000 cubic kilometers of ash, rock and pyroclastic materials were released. The crater was nearly a kilometre deep and 70 by 40 km in size (45 by 25 miles). (To date, the caldera has mostly been filled-in and changed in size.)

In addition to the last great eruptive cycle there were two other previous ones in the Yellowstone area.

The first and largest eruption occurred to the south west of the current park boundaries 2.2 million years ago releasing 2,500 cubic kilometres of ash, pumice and oth er pyroclastics. The caldera was about 30 by 50 miles in size and hundreds of metres deep. By now, however, it has been filled in by subsequent eruptions. The geologic formation created by this eruption is called the Huckleberry Ridge Tuff. The second eruption ( 1.2 million years ago) ejected 280 cubic km of material and formed the much smaller Island Park Caldera and the geologic formation called the Mesa Falls Tuff.



Due to the e xceptionally large explosive eruptions, Yellowstone's volcano is called a "supervolcano".

According to the Volcanic Exposivity Index (VEI), a logarithmic scale used to assess the magnitude of volcanic eruptions, a super-eruption is an event expelling a mass of 450 or more cubic kilometers of material. In comparison the eruption of Mount St. Helens in 1980, which produced 1 to 2 cubic kilometers of volcanic rock, was a minuscule event yet had many unfortunate ramifications on the population in the vicinity of the blast. The repercussions of an eruption of the super volcanic size are incomprehensible. After an eruption the surrounding region would see the greatest devastation, covered by pyroclastic deposits and thick ash fall exterminating most all life and destroying all structures in its path. In landscapes of greater distance from the event the consequences will be less dramatic yet still substantial. Records of previous eruption data from the Yellowstone super-volcano show that the ash fall out from the eruption can cover areas as large as one million square kilometers and could leave the area covered in ash up to 10 centimeters thick. This would cause destruction of agriculture, extensive damage to structures, decreased temperatures, and potential respiratory hazards.

Only a few threatening super-volcanoes are being closely monitored at this time, Yellowstone, Long Valley in California, and Phlegrean Fields in Italy. Seismic unrest, ground heating and swelling, changes in groundwater temperature, and increased concentrations and fluxes of volatile gases may indicate an impeding eruption.

The eruption itself is the climax of a cycle, in which the roof of a partially-emptied magma chamber collapses, creating thus a crater, or caldera. During this process vast amounts of volcanic material gets realeased (usually through fissures that ring the caldera). It is difficult to predict the time for the next cataclysmic eruption in the Yellowstone area due to the small number of such eruptions. we do know, however, that t he time between the cataclysmic eruptions so far has ranged from 600,000 to 900,000 years.

At this time, we poorly understand the length of build up to an eruption, if the size or course of events can be predicted with monitoring, what precursory activity is, or if initial activity will lead to an eruption. Studies of source vents indicate that super-eruptions occur only from very complex and evolved magma chambers. In order for a super-eruption to occur a silica-rich magma is required, in addition, the magma must be near the surface and contain a high amount of silica with at least 40% suspended crystals, and contain a large amount of dissolved gases. These characteristics lead to a magma that is viscous having a high surface tension, which allows for quick degassing and fragmentation of the magma. This fragmentation is a result of the magma expanding and immediately cooling as pressure is released from the system. This type of pyroclastic magma system is driven by the high volatile gas content, which is released as the magma rises to the surface. If the heat and gases fail to leak out in small eruption forms, the system will eventually lead to a super-eruption. When one of these super-eruptions occurs, it would most definitely be a global catastrophe. However studies of these monstrous events suggest that they alone are not capable of causing mass extinction of a species. Depending on timing, magnitude, and intensity of the eruption, many animals are able to survive these events. Most animal populations can recover quickly as long as the flora populations are able to recover. For human concern, an eruption such as this could affect agriculture over millions of square kilometers and could alter the global climate for decades. Considering 90% of the world's population lives in the Northern Hemisphere and most of the food production takes place here as well, a super-eruption can, and most likely will, cause devastation to many populations. It is a natural disaster that we are unable to prevent and the next eruption could occur tomorrow or 10,000 years from now.

The current Yellowstone caldera occupies 70 square kilometers of the Park and has been dormant since the last lava flow 70,000 years ago. However, recent activity indicates the system's unrest. In addition to ground deformation the system also experiences earthquake swarms and gas and heat emissions. It releases approximately 45,000 tons of carbon dioxide per day. Scientists are unsure if this activity is constant with the cooling of a large magma system or if it is maintaining its output. The system is clearly still active. Possible precursors to an eruption include intense unrest, possibly followed by a smaller eruption or a lava flow, or a small eruption that produces a lava flow and induces an explosive eruption. Scientists believe that the last eruption of Yellowstone 640,000 years ago was preceded by periodic lava flows that occurred for a half a million years until ending with the violent eruption. Since the last lava flow there have been no new flows out of the system. However if the pressure of the overlying solid crust was to be reduced, either by an earthquake or the continued swelling of the two resurgent domes, the gases could be released and trigger another violent eruption. The deposits from the last Yellowstone eruption have provided researchers with enough scientific data to determine that the system has a cyclic pattern to its eruptive events. Each catastrophic eruption is prefaced by a span of 200,000 to 600,000 years of sporadic basaltic and rhyolitic lava flows. This results from the magma chamber evolving near the surface and producing a ring-fracture system, which allows for intermittent lava extrusions. The creation of the ring-fracture system is eventually followed by a cataclysmic eruption of the magma chamber. After the eruption a period of surface cooling and magma reformation takes place. This is indicated by more sporadic lava flows that refill the caldera floor. If this cycle proves to repeat itself in the future, the basaltic eruptions from 150,000 to 70,000 years ago could be an indication of an impending eruption. However, they could also be an indication that the system is cooling off since its last explosive event. All geologic, petrologic and geophysical data of Yellowstone seem to point toward a system with the ability to produce future eruptive episodes. In either instance it seems obvious that the magmatic chamber is still active and evolving.

The recent quakes have scientists on high alert about the possibility of a supervolcano eruption. Although it had not happened in 640,000 years, a supereruption could easily cover the U.S. in a blanket of thick smog and ash. The quakes themselves are also dangerous. The burning question is whether c ould Yellowstone's quakes lead to an eruption or could the quakes themselves pose a threat?
Stresses on the Earth's crust from tectonic forces as well as stress related to the volcanic system are responsible for Yellowstone's earthquakes. The area has one of the highest rates of seismicity in the western US, experiencing 1,000 to 3,000 earthquakes in a typical year, including the largest historic earthquake of the Intermountain West - a magnitude 7.5 event in 1959.

It was centered near Hebgen Lake, Montana and is responsible for the death of 28 people and causing a $11 million dollar damage. New geysers appeared and the existing ones changed eruption times. On June 30, 1975, a magnitude 6.4 tremor hit the park.

Records show there were 69 swarms in Yellowstone between 1984 and 2006. ( Swarms are earthquakes that occur close in time and space without a pronounced main event and are the most common process for releasing stress in the Yellowstone area.)

The largest quake storm appeared in 1985, with over 3,000 quakes over several months. The 2009 and the 1983 swarm are classed as "small swarms" as they consist of less than 1,000 quakes. The 1983 swarm consisted of 70 some quakes, while the 2009

had included 12 events of magnitude 3.0 to 3.9 and approximately 20 of 2.5 to 2.9, with a total of 400 quakes large enough to be located. Although similar swarms have occurred in the past without triggering steam explosions or volcanic activity, the possibility for explosions cannot be excluded, said the observatory, and the earthquakes also may continue and increase in intensity.

Since 2007, new instruments deployed by EarthScope are aiding scientists from the University of Utah in interpreting the earthquake swarm. Earthquake Recording Station H17A was installed in the park in the fall of 2007 and is located on the western edge of Yellowstone Lake. O ther EarthScope instruments in the area include 24 Global Positioning Systems (GPS), five borehole strainmeters, six borehole seismometers, and six tiltmeters. These instruments augment a network of 28 seismographs that have been operated for many years by the University of Utah. Together these instruments enhance volcanic and seismic hazards monitoring, improve the determination of earthquake locations and the identification of anomalous sources of seismic activity, and provide additional clues to better understand how earthquakes originate. In 2004 , GPS instruments measured the Yellowstone caldera uplifting at a rate of 2.7 inches (7 centimeters) per year, three times faster than the average rate during recorded history. Researchers attributed this deformation to the magmatic recharge of the Yellowstone magma chamber at a depth of 6 miles (10 km). Since then, the rate has decreased to about 1.5 inches (4 centimeters) per year.
Monitoring and studying this complex volcanic system continues. With access to new data from the EarthScope instruments coupled with measurements from the University of Utah stations in the Yellowstone region, researchers hope to better understand what is really happening below the surface.

Health Effects of Atmospheric Volcanic Ash

Research of the health effects of volcanic ash on the human respiratory system has only been conducted extensively over the last 40 years. This is due to the lack of major volcanic episodes in densely populated modern settings. Since the eruption of Mount St. Helens many researchers have been concerned with the long-term health consequences that the public can incur from volcanic ash exposure. Many people experienced intense anxiety because of their concern about the effects of exposure to ash because little information existed at the time. Of all the hazards associated with an eruption, ash fall can affect the largest range of people because of the wide area covered by the fallout. Ash can often remain in the atmosphere for years depending on the volume released and is often remobilized by wind and human activity. Volcanic ash is composed of particles of fragmented volcanic rock usually less then 2 millimeters in diameter that form during volcanic explosions. Studies show that the health effects of the particles are dependant on their morphology, mineralogical composition and physio-chemical properties. The composition of the ash particles varies depending on the characteristics of the magma from which it is derived from. Particles must also be in the breathable size range, less than 10 micrometers, to cause any lung damage. In the eruption of Mount St. Helens 90% of the ash particles were in this range. One of the larger concerns for human health is the concentration of free crystalline silica, which can cause silicosis if exposure is prolonged and in excess of 50 micrograms per cubic meter. The concern about free crystalline silica in volcanic ash stems from the known effects incurred from prolonged exposure to airborne silica in industrial settings. Many cases of silicosis, non-specific pneumoconiosis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease have been reported after exposure. The properties of the respired ash have a significantly contribute to the symptoms that may be incurred after exposure. Morphology, or the size and shape of the ash particles, is important because of the possible presence of respirable size fibrous minerals. Concern for fibrous minerals stems from the possible carcinogenic effects to humans due to the size, shape, and biological persistence of the particle not necessarily to the type of mineral. The mineralogical or elemental composition of the ash is still of concern however and determined by the parent material it was derived from, basalt, andesite, dacite, or rhyolite. Basalt and andesite types have very small amounts of free crystalline but the dacite and rhyolite types carry more of the substance, so exposure to these types leads to a larger concern. The physiochemical properties of the surfaces of the ash particles are of concern because fallen ash may have acid coatings which can cause eye and lung irritation. These properties combined in specific ratios can leave exposed public in need of serious medical attention. The National Environmental Quality Standard for total suspended particulates (TSP) in the atmosphere is 100 micrograms per cubic meter. Significant harm can occur if exposure at this level occurs for longer than 24 hours. Studies show that levels this high can provoke respiratory illness in exposed persons. The peak levels of TSP after the Mount St. Helens eruption were over 30,000 micrograms per cubic meter. This ash was determined to be high in silica and was a large health concern if exposure was prolonged. After surveillance of hospital visits before and after the eruption of Mount St. Helens it was determined that no excessive respiratory illnesses occurred due to exposure to the ash. A similar study in Japan concerning the exposure to ash from Mount Sakurajima, which has frequent small-scale eruptions, showed the exposure of TSP to often be above the National Environmental Quality Standards. A questionnaire of residents living in the area for over three years determined that nonspecific respiratory disease was in low occurrence, less than 10%, in two separate study locations. This study confirmed the findings at Mount St. Helens, that the health effects to persons exposed to volcanic ash are minimal. These studies do indicate that exposure to the ash may be a cause of health concern for people with bronchitis, asthma, emphysema and severe heart problems. However the general public, exposed for short periods of time, are not severely affected by the ash particles. Volcanic ash is generally biologically inert and symptoms from volcanic ash mainly result from the irritating effect they have on mucus membranes and not from fibrous content for the crystalline silica. Other potential effects of minimal concern include eye irritation and skin irritation from contact with the body surface. In the event of an eruption of the Yellowstone super-volcano the potential for atmospheric ash will be on a much larger scale than these two examples of smaller ejection eruptions. It is difficult to determine if the effects of the Yellowstone ash particles will be the similar to the examples provided above, however the evidence shows that volcanic ash may pose less of a health concern than previously thought. The greatest concern will not be the health effects of ash inhalation. Consideration of the other potential ramifications of the ash fall such as agricultural and structural damage may be of larger concern to the prosperity of the population. It is important to also keep in mind that the atmospheric opacity will be of greatest concern.

Other Consequences of Super-Volcanic Eruptions

It is clear at this point that a super-volcanic eruption would present consequences to society of a scope that have not been experienced in human history. The effects from an eruption of the Yellowstone volcano will be incurred by most of the population in the United States and depending on the size and scale, possibly by the entire population on the Earth. Models of the climatic effect of this type of eruption show potential global devastation for periods of decades. Pyroclastic clouds, caldera collapse, volatile gas release, and atmospheric ash clouds will disrupt modern life and disable many of the systems on which we depend on. In the immediate vicinity of the eruption the entire landscape will be leveled and any human-made structures will be completely demolished by the collapse of the caldera floor. The subsiding crater may be 15 to 100 kilometers in diameter but will cause structural damage for hundreds to thousands of square kilometers. The ash flows, also called pyroclastic clouds, hug the ground with a thick, extremely hot, fast flowing mixture of volcanic ash and volatile gases. This can cover 20,000 square kilometers from the source vent and can leave a deposit of ash and pumice 10 to 100 meters thick. Temperatures of these flows can reach 100's of degrees Celsius and will leave nothing alive in their path. The release of volatile gases, mostly carbon dioxide and water vapor, is of less concern in this type of event because of the vast amount of gases already present in our atmosphere. It is thought that their release would cause little change. The most concerning impact of the eruption will likely be the atmospheric ash clouds that have the potential to affect the entire planet. The ash cloud can cause two different consequences after a super-volcanic eruption. Injection into the upper atmosphere can cause the formation of sulfuric acid aerosols leading to potential global cooling and in the lower atmosphere and the eventual fallout of the ash can cause damage with the collection of thick layers of ash and disruption of physical health of animals. The ash cloud from the Toba eruption, that released 2500km3 of material, injected 1015 grams of fine ash into the Stratosphere. According to ice core data the fall out of this ash from the stratosphere after Toba took approximately 6 years. The concern of this gas-laden ash entering the stratosphere is the chemical reactions that occur with the stratospheric gases. The sulfuric gases that are emitted from the eruption have the potential to reach to tropopause 15-20 kilometers above the surface. These gases, especially sulfuric acid, react with the water vapor in the lower stratosphere to form a sulfuric aerosol. This aerosol backscatters and absorbs the solar radiation entering the Earth's atmosphere. This causes a cooling effect in the lower atmosphere and could lead to a global climate changes. The aerosols can quickly encircle an entire hemisphere and it can encircle the entire globe depending on the season of the eruption. This could lead to a global temperature change of 3-5 degrees Celsius for an extended period of time. Atmospheric modeling of an eruption event at the same latitude as the Yellowstone volcano indicated severe short-term cooling globally of less than 10 degrees Celsius with recovery period lasting up to 10 years. The total effects of this climatic change is uncertain considering the complexity of our climatic system, however it is sure to have severe consequences to modern society. The other potential effect of the atmospheric ash cloud is the fall out of the material as it stretches across the landscape. The accumulating ash near the volcano could be 10 meters thick and at father distances would thin out to few centimeters, possibly 1 million square kilometers down wind. These deposits would most likely be up to 10 centimeters at greater distances. Fall out of the ash cloud usually occurs up to 24 hours after atmospheric injection at distances greater than 150 kilometers. The larger ash particles will fall out closer to the source vent and smaller particles, less than 500 micrometers, can remain in the atmosphere and move downwind. Research done on the shape of the particles shows that atmospheric drag affects the distance traveled because of the non-spherical shape of volcanic ash. This ash can contaminate water supplies, disrupt transportation, cause failure of electronic equipment, disrupt aviation and can cause structural collapse. The potential coverage over a continent sized area would increase the albedo of the Earth's surface, which could lead to even great heat loss to the lower atmosphere. It may also kill much of the vegetation and if deposited on the ocean surface, could cause carbon dioxide draw down from the atmosphere and changes to ocean's carbon dioxide cycle. These consequences have the potential to devastate the global economy and leave many incapacitated after the event. Not to mention the potential health affects caused by inhalation of the silicic laden ash.

Potential Mitigation Procedures

In the event of a super-volcanic eruption of the Yellowstone volcano the citizens of the United States need to have preparedness and mitigation procedures in place to reduce chaos and increase awareness of the dangers involved. After investigation of the consequences of super-volcanic eruptions the Geologic Society of London Working Group determined actions that need to be taken to create such a plan. They suggest investment in better research of the known source vents and of possible sites of unknown vents, collaboration of volcanologists and climatologists in preparing data, increased research of the composition of gases and particles that may be released, increased research of past eruption events, initiatives to improve understanding of the nature of the hazards, and development of a multidisciplinary task force to determine the environmental, economic, social, and political consequences of the fall out. These actions are logical and necessary to our understanding of the consequences that we may incur. They will give our population the most applicable knowledge and understanding in order to prepare ourselves for the event. To make this knowledge useful we also need methods in place to disburse the information gained to the general public to ensure everyone can understand how to react and what actions need to be taken. A threat of this type is not something that human communities have been preparing for throughout human history. Some type of preparedness is necessary because in the event of an eruption people will need to know how to react. It is very likely that there will little time to prepare in locations such as Nebraska for example, only a matter of hours. This may allow for some organization and preparation, but it is necessary that people know what to do with that time. In addition to utilizing the suggestions of the Working Group one of the first steps that need to be taken is education of the public. Increasing awareness of the geologic potential of Yellowstone through some type of education program is a necessity. This would allow for a common working knowledge amongst our communities of the possible consequences. It would also be helpful to provide specific information to specific public, for example preparing farming communities for the agricultural effects. These types of small steps can go a long way. If more people are prepared the chaos and disruption to our lives can be minimized in the long term and recovery to a functioning system may be more attainable in the aftermath. Citizens in Nebraska could reduce the threat on their families by having a type of disaster preparation system in their homes. Many will face long periods trapped in doors without the ability to go outside or travel and will need supplies to ensure safety and survival. Items to have on hand include facial masks for protection of respiratory threats, a battery operated radio, a non-perishable food supply, flashlights, water jugs, and so forth. Many of these items are already available in most homes and simple organization is the key to safely. If people know what to expect then they will have a better understanding of how to keep themselves and their families safe and secure.