and is different from other hotels in the area.The guests are discerning and low key, who want to be near the Las Vegas Strip but would rather spend their nights in a peaceful, calmer hotel. The Ritz-Carlton prides itself on it's customer service, the service feels posh and deluxe, but not over the top or pretentious. You will feel equally at ease in the hotel whether you prefer to wear jeans or a suit, and the hotel is well known for offering a warm welcome to gay couples.
The hotel was designed by the architects Wimberly, Allison, Tong & Goo who followed instructions to design a Tuscan Italian-Mediterranean style resort. The three-storey 375ft span bridge structure emulates Italy's Pontevecchio and spans a secluded lake and is home to Club Level guestrooms, function areas and retail space.

The hotel is U-shape which provides guests with fabulous panoramic views of the lake and mountains. Attached to the hotel is a adjacent casino, and the two-storey spa contains treatment rooms arranged in pavilions, surrounding an interior Italian garden courtyard. A conference centre overlooks the retail village and formal Italian gardens and lake.

The construction of the Lake Las Vegas was carried out by Perini Building. The primary challenge was the construction of the Pontevecchio Bridge over Lake Las Vegas. There are four bridge abutments with 16 driven piles per abutment.

The most difficult portion of this phase was driving piles adjacent to the two underground by-pass pipelines, which carry the Las Vegas wash overflow under Lake Las Vegas and directly into Lake Mead.

The danger of collapse or damage to the pipelines due to the close proximity of the pile-driving operation required extra caution, as well as added insurance liability. Once the piles were driven, and the pile caps and abutment walls were poured and in place, barges were brought in to erect structural steel and metal decking.

Another challenge faced was meeting the Ritz-Carlton's standard limiting visibility of electrical and mechanical trim. This required detailed coordination between the interior designer and each subcontractor to determine exact placement of electrical receptacles, air supply and return, and access panels.
The spa is situated on two levels, with a relaxing garden, a cafe serving healthy food and light snacks and access to a stately pool area Treatments include the Mesquite Tree Coccon body polish, which is very popular, and the Gentleman's Fitness Facial is a great for the dry Las Vegas air. If you are visiting with a guest then why not try a Duet Massage too. which fe atures traditional and innovative dishes such as a morning favorite of two perfectly poached eggs on top of a crispy Dungeness crab and potato cake The Medici Ca fe Terrace offers a relaxed but elegant dining experience in a beautiful room filled with fragrant floral arrangements. Banquettes and chairs are covered in opulent fabrics, brocades and the finest silks. Magnificent European botanical and Italian Renaissance artwork bedecks the walls. The Medici Cafe Terrace seats 120 guests inside and 35 outside, to dine in a romantic setting next to the gorgeous Florentine gardens.
The Medici Cafe and Terrace is open from 7am until 11am so you can enjoy an early or a leisurely breakfast. Lunch is served from 12noon until 3pm and dinner from 6pm until 10pm. The unmissable weekend brunch can be enjoyed on Saturdays and Sundays from 7am until 3pm.
The menu changes regularly, but there is always some interesting creations to try such as Muscovy duck confit served with sherry lentils, shaved foie gras, and apples; followed by sake-soy-brined salmon with coconut-jasmine rice, candied Japanese eggplant, and Thai butter. On Sundays between 11 am and 2:30 there is the Veuve Clicquot champagne brunch. This is a splendid buffet spread, and while you eat you will be entertained by live jazz music from the saxophonist George Butts.

served in the Firenze Lobby Lounge and is another tradition at the hotel and more relaxed that similar teas served in other luxury hotels. offering not only traditional scones, finger sandwiches and pastries but also delicious Italian savories You'll love the romantic, relaxing lounge in this warm, living room setting. You'll find yourself surrounded by amazing works of art and equally as amazing views of Lake Las Vegas and high-desert mountains. There are aromatic fresh floral arrangements on every table. Terrace service is offered on fine-weather days. .It beco mes a bustling hive of activity with live entertainment. The Firenze Lobby Lounge is open from 11am until 1am and the Florentine Tea is available from 2:30pm until 5pm.

The Ritz-Carlton even has it's own world champion Executive Pastry Chef - Chris Hamner. Chef Hanmer has nearly 15 years of experience in the culinary industry, and his creations can be experienced at the resort's Medici Café and Terrace restaurant.

Chef Hanmer competed in the World Pastry Team Championship in 2004, which was televised on the Food Network. At the age of 26, he became the youngest American to win this championship.
Before joining The Ritz-Carlton in 2005, Chef Hanmer worked as an Assistant Pastry Chef at the Bellagio in Las Vegas. He has also worked at the International School of Confectionary Arts in Gaithersburg, Md., where he participated in national and global demonstrations with famed confectioner Ewald Notter. His educational background includes a certificate in culinary arts from Orange Coast College, in Costa Mesa, Calif. and advanced culinary studies in France at L' Ecole Du Grand Chocolat.

His focus is on creating innovative desserts with a new twist. For example, warm churros rolled in cinnamon sugar; frozen vanilla parfait with roasted honey peaches and almond tuile; and "Coffee a Go-Go" created with coffee gelee, orange cremeux and candied pistachio are all Chef Hanmer's creations for the resort's afternoon tea.

You can also enjoy his creations in your room. Sample such delights as warm cookies and milk; fresh baked mini chocolate chip cookies wrapped in wax paper accompanied by an old-fashioned bottle of milk nestled in ice; and pineapple upside-down cake.

The Ritz Carlton is a great place for families. If you love Vegas but don't really want to stay with the kids in the hubbub of the Strip, the Ritz is the perfect alternative. The hotel caters for kids perfectly and there is even a kids club called "Ritz Kids" which runs during the summer months for children aged between 5 and 12. Every day there are 2 sessions that last three hours with a whole from variety of activities on offer from arts and crafts to water sports, educational and nature programs and board and lawn games The also run themed days such as "Safari Day" or "Chef for a Day" which are a lot of fun. Kids can do a full day to include both sessions, and for an extra charge they can have a Lunch Buddy who takes them to a poolside lunch between sessions, so you can be assured they are looked after for the whole day. At the time of writing the club costs $25 for a three hour session, or $40 for two sessions in the same day.
There are many other features of this hotel that make it particularly attractive to families. Of course all kids love to play on the beach, and at the Ritz you have access to a private white sand beach. There is also 24-hour access to the swimming pool and whirlpool and there are plenty of beach and pool tools available for you to use too. You could choose to play lakeside beach volleyball, or make use of the hotel mountain bikes to go for a family bike ride You can play Croquet, or wind down on an evening with a board game.
There are also plenty of great family attractions just a short drive away s uch as Red Rock Canyon just west of Las Vegas, Lake Mead National Recreation Area, Hoover Dam, Valley of Fire and the Boulder City Historic District.
for children and adults, couples and families and night time merry-makers of all ages.
The moonlight Spa is not available anywhere else in the world. This outdoor experience can be taken only seven nights of the month: three nights during the waxing phase of the moon, once during the full moon, and three times during the waning of the moon. The Ritz-Carlton, like early man, see the lunar phases as having an impact on our physical health. Lake Las Vegas Spa offers three exclusive bodywork experiences inspired by the lunar effects. The unique treatments take place on the shores of the resorts private lagoon, and you'll be bathed in moonlight away from the distracting Las Vegas city lights. They are based on the phases of the moon and individuals or couples can connect to the natural rhythms of the moon. During the waxing phase, gravity feels at its most intense, and deep therapeutic massage is combined with gentle stretching to relax the body and clear the mind. It is suggested that this is a good time to contemplate your personal goals. A full moon signifies energy, so your treatment during this lunar period includes an invigorating massage with special attention to the scalp. Guests can take advantage of the intense energy of this phase to realise their goals. When the moon wanes, surrender and calm are utmostl. Light, relaxed, soothing massage is performed at this time, using delicate aromatherapy oil blends Special attention will be paid to pressure points on the hands and feet to help you feel calm and relaxed. Moonlight Spa guests are also given a crystal representing the phase of the moon under which they experience their outdoor treatment.
Midnight at the Oasis is an amazingly opulent midnight dining experience that offers a white glove fine dining service and Cristal champagne served in one of the resorts romantic private poolside cabanas.
Fly by Night takes place just before dusk, and you can participate in this catch-and-release activity, catching bass, trout, carp and catfish in the 320-acre Lake Las Vegas. All the equipment you need will be provided, and you don't need a fishing license. You can choose to fish either from shore or on a provided watercraft. You can also choose to upgrade and takea full fly-fishing lesson.

Stars and Smores is lovely for both date nights and families too. It is an hour long guided viewing of the night sky of southern Nevada with amazing views of the sky without the light pollution of the Strip. Guests are guided on a tour of the heavens using professional-caliber telescopes, and then treated to smores and beverages.
Night at the Beach is the perfect romantic encounter. You'll be provided with a picnic basket for two ( or more if you prefer)and you'll be able to relax on a private lagoon beach, enjoying the starlit desert sky and the lbeautiful sounds of the adjoining waterfall.
. For the more energetic the Sundown Bike Ride offers a 3 mile round trip around the resort where you will be able to see the flora, fauna and twinkling lights of the beautiful mansions surrounding the Lake Las Vegas shoreline. Bikes and maps are provided by the resort, and the property resort fee allows guests one hour of bicycle use free of charge.
Dive-In Movies / Mojitos and Manicures is great for everyone too. Family movies and kid-friendly new releases are shown on a screen by the pool. Guests can watch the movies from pool chairs or floats. Snacks such as hot dogs, candy and snow-cones, are available too. At the same time, adults can choose to enjoy Mojitos & Manicures from 6:30 p.m. until 8:30 p.m. directly on The Ritz-Carlton pool deck. This is an adult only add-on where you can have a manicure that takes 25 minutes, and also enjoy a fresh chilled Mojito cocktail.
If you fancy having a quiet dinner at the resorts romantic Medici Cafe & Terrace on Friday and Saturday evenings, then you could treat the kids to a Kids Night Out. This fully supervised night of fun andexcitement ncludes a special dinner, movies, and arts and crafts from 6 to 9 p.m. -- or until 11 p.m. for parents who require a slightly longer time out.
For those who are up with the lark, try Sunrise Yoga, a magical desert dawn experience. These complimentary yoga classes are offered near the resorts tranquil waterfall lagoon.

in-room safes, Wi-Fi, stocked minibars, clock radio/CD players, large writing desks. Or how about the ultimate package? If you have a spare £100,000 to spend on a holiday, then you can have the ultimate package that includes t wo night stay in The Ritz-Carlton's 2,400 square-foot Presidential Suite; Limousine transportation from McCarran International Airport to a helipad where you and your partner willtravel helicopter to Lake Las Vegas with champagne, then to be serenaded by a gondolier while riding a gondola from the Lake Las Vegas helicopter landing to The Ritz-Carlton's shore; Cristal Champagne and gourmet picnic basket upon arrival; d inner for the first night to include private in-room dinner to be prepared by a dedicated chef and waiting staff; d inner for the second night to include private champagne-tasting dinner aboard Lake Las Vegas' yacht, and a string-trio to play for you throughout the evening with rose petals strewn throughout yacht; 14 dozen roses; the use of luxury car of choice during your stay; a $50,000 shopping spree at Neiman Marcus , complete with round-trip limousine service; $5,000 line of credit at the MonteLago Casino ; a p rivate fantasy butler; a b utler-drawn Cristal champagne bath; a Prada Beauty couples body treatment in your room; p ersonalized bath robes; m onogrammed pillow cases; breakfast in bed every day of your holiday; a n ightly rose petal turndown; a leaving present of The Ritz-Carlton bedding and linens and a bottle of Cristal Champagne; l imousine service from The Ritz-Carlton to McCarran International Airport; Resort fee; v alet parking; and transportation to and from airport in originating city.
itting and car rental arrangements, complimentary indoor self-parking or valet service . There is a business center in the hotel and a concierge desk. There is daily housekeeping of your room too. The hotel has a gift shop, ice and vending machines. There are non-smoking rooms available, safe deposit boxes, valet laundry service and video cassette player/recorder rental.
Special facilities are offered for physically challenged guests including: braille signage and TTY communications equipment, four king bedded rooms and one executive suite equipped for hearing-impaired guests, and wheelchair accessible rooms.

In total there is 33,000ft² of indoor meeting space, as well as space for outdoor events and a selection of scenic lakefront and garden settings. Perfect for any business conference, meeting, retreat, wedding or other social gatherings.

The hotel also offers the services of a professional conference services manager, catering sales manager and catering services manager, who will work with each meeting planner to customise your perfect function for your exact needs.

The Ritz-Carlton Grand Ballroom is 11,813ft² and has high vaulted ceilings, crystal chandeliers, pin-spot lighting capabilities and plenty of pre-function space. The room has stunning garden views and an expansive outdoor terrace which is easily accessible. The room can be divided into four with soundproof walls, data and voice lines, light panel controls and private sound systems in each section.

The MonteLago Ballroom is 4,700ft². This ballroom also has crystal chandeliers, pin-spot lighting capabilities and access to the resort's garden. This room can be divided into two smaller ballrooms with all the features of the Grand Ballroom.

The Estate and Village Boardrooms have wood panelling, natural lighting, data and voice lines, light panel controls and private sound systems, and overstuffed executive chairs and both can accommodate up to 50 people.

There are also eight function rooms with open floor plans, luxurious carpeting, silk wall coverings, data and voice lines, light panel controls and private sound systems and they can accommodate from 22 to 100 guests.

As well as this there is also a very versatile 7,423ft² pre-function area that has easy terrace access and additional space to events held in the Ritz-Carlton Grand Ballroom.

The Short, but Sweet Wedding Experience - An exclusive escape for the bride and groom who wish to celebrate their nuptials as a party of two. The Presidential Suite Ceremony - Celebrate your wedding and reception in the most exclusive suite in the hotel, with over 2,400 square-feet of luxurious living and entertaining space, perfect for an intimate event. This package is suitable for 2-20 guests. The White Sand Beach Ceremony - Have your marriage ceremony in a truly remarkable setting, on a beautiful, semi-secluded white sand beach surrounded by a sparkling waterfall overlooking Lake Las Vegas and the stunning PonteVecchio Bridge. This package is suitable for 2-50 guests. The Tuscany Courtyard Ceremony - Host your wedding on an intimately private terrace with a backdrop view of a Tuscan-themed village. This package is suitable for 2-50 guests. The PonteVecchio Park Ceremony - Take your vows under a romantic gazebo, in a lakeside lawn setting with a backdrop of the PonteVecchio Bridge and desert mountain landscape. This package is suitable for 75-150 guests. The Florentine Garden Ceremony- How about a charming outdoor wedding in a fairytale-like manicured garden and cobblestone courtyard setting? This package is suitable for 51-200 guests.