Registration Information
What You Need to Bring with You You will need additional information to title and register a vehicle If you are a new Virginia resident or lease your vehicle. See above.
Once y our vehicle must be titled in Virginia , complete an Application for Registration (VSA 14) and present: The completed Application for Registration VSA14. Your emissions certificate if your vehicle is garaged in the counties of Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, Prince William, or Stafford, or in the cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, Falls Church, Manassas, or Manassas Park. Motorcycles are not required to have an emissions inspection. Note: When you have your vehicle's emissions system inspected, the emissions inspection station will electronically update your DMV vehicle record with the test results immediately. When registering your vehicle, DMV will not ask you for emissions information unless your vehicle failed the test or this information has not been received from the inspection station. To purchase license plates or decals, you must certify that the vehicle is covered by the minimum insurance requirements or pay the uninsured motor vehicle fee. Your insurance carrier must be authorized to conduct business in Virginia. Virginia requires the following minimum coverage: Bodily injury/death of one person: $25,000 Bodily injury/death of two or more persons: $50,000 Property damage: $20,000 Note: If liability insurance coverage on a vehicle terminates or cancels during the registration period, either reinsure the vehicle, pay the uninsured motor vehicle fee or surrender the license plates to DMV. Fees Your registration fee is determined by the empty weight or gross weight of your vehicle, the type of license plate you purchase and whether you register for more than one year. If you register your vehicle for two years, you will receive a $2 discount. You can save even more when you renew your registration for three years online or by telephone. If you renew your registration for three years, you will receive a $3 discount. The three year registration is not available the first time you register your vehicle.
For convenience and fun, register your vehicle for two or three years and purchase one of our special plates.
Your License Plates DMV will issue you two license plates, decals showing the expiration date and a registration card. Place the decals on the plates. Place the plates on the front and rear of your vehicle so that they are securely fastened and clearly visible. If your vehicle is a motorcycle, tractor truck, semitrailer or trailer, DMV will issue you one license plate for the vehicle.
It is illegal to mount colored glass, plastic, or any other type of covering on your license plates that alters or obscures the letters, numbers, decals or the state where the vehicle is registered and when the registration expires.
Remember to keep the registration card with you whenever you operate the vehicle.
Registration Renewal
After your first registration, DMV will mail your renewal notice prior to the expiration date of your registration. You can renew your registration by telephone, mail or renew online or at any DMV Select or customer service center.
A new Virginia law, effective July 1, 2008, encourages customers to save money and time by renewing vehicle registrations (decals) online, by telephone, through the mail or a DMV Select.
Discounts and surcharges If you renew in person at a customer service center, you'll pay an additional $5 fee for each vehicle registration renewal transaction. If you renew your vehicle registration for two years, you receive a $2 discount. If you renew your registration by telephone, you can renew for three years and receive a $3 discount. Additionally, if you renew your registration online, you can renew for three years and receive a $4 discount (a $3 discount for a three year renewal and an additional $1 discount for using the internet). The discounts for Internet and two-year or three-year renewals are not prorated and not refundable if the registration is canceled before it expires.
Your registration renewal service options are:
Customer Service Centers. Customers who renew their vehicle registrations in a CSC beginning July 1, 2008 will pay an additional $5. The fee will not apply if your registration renewal is conducted with another transaction for you, and the second transaction cannot be completed online, by mail, by telephone or at a DMV Select location. Only a few transactions must be completed at a CSC, such as an application for an original driver's license. Internet. Renew online at www.dmvNOW.com, receive a $1 discount, and avoid the $5 fee. Renew for two years and receive an additional $2 discount (for a total discount of $3) or renew for three years and receive an additional $3 discount (for a total discount of $4). Telephone. Renew by using the DMV automated service (1-888-337-4782) to avoid the $5 fee. Additionally, when you renew for one, two or three years you will receive a discount of $1 for each year. Mail. Avoid the $5 fee by mailing in the vehicle renewal notice. Most customers receive their vehicle registration materials within five days, but U.S. mail delivery times vary. Please allow 15 days to receive your decals before contacting DMV. DMV Select. Visit one of the 50 DMV Select offices in Virginia to avoid the $5 fee. Visit www.dmvNOW.com for a list of DMV Select locations. Military Returning From Outside the United States If you own a vehicle registered in Virginia and are serving, or have served, outside of the United States on active duty military service, the Code of Virginia, 6.2-221.4, grants you a 90-day grace period, from the date you return to the United States, in which to renew your current registration. The grace period applies to qualifying vehicles only.
To be eligible for the grace period, the vehicle must: Be owned or leased by you while you were serving outside of the United States in the armed services of the United States Have had valid registration issued by DMV at the time you began service in the armed forces outside of the United States Be properly insured Display the latest license plates and decals issued by DMV for the vehicle; AND
Be operated only by you, or another person who qualifies for the grace period, while possessing: Orders or other military documentation demonstrating that you, or they, are entitled to the grace period The latest registration card issued by DMV for the vehicle. You do not have to wait until you are in the grace period to renew. If possible, you may renew your qualifying vehicle registration prior to returning to Virginia.
State-Owned Vehicles Titling and registering a state-owned vehicle differs from titling and registering a personal vehicle because state registrations do not expire and state-owned vehicles must have public use license plates with a state designation.
Because the registrations do not expire, state agencies have an additional responsibility to remove state-owned vehicles from the Department of Motor Vehicles' (DMV) automated system when the agency sells or disposes of a vehicle.
When an agency completes the "Application for Certificate of Title and Registration" (VSA-17A), section 10 must indicate "YES", and the correct state agency code must be entered. If an incorrect code is entered, the DMV database field for a state-owned vehicle may display an "L" for locality instead of an "S" for state. The result of this discrepancy would exclude the vehicle from DMV's listing of state-owned vehicles. Additionally, care should be taken to enter the correct vehicle identification number (VIN).
State Title and Registration System (STARS) Agencies Agencies using STARS are responsible for ensuring that their vehicle records are accurate on DMV's database. DMV uses information provided by the Department of General Services (DGS) and agency information to update registrations in STARS. Since STARS agencies enter vehicle information directly on DMV's database, it is especially important that they enter all information correctly. Four agencies, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Corrections, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, and DGS - Office of Fleet Management Services, currently use STARS.
All STARS agencies should specify in the Employee Work Profile (EWP) of at least one employee and a supervisor that they are trained to use STARS to maintain the agency's records on DMV's database. DMV has provided each STARS agency with a "STARS Guidebook" (formerly the "Virginia Vehicle Licensing Guidebook") containing detailed instructions on how to use the automated system. New STARS agencies or those with staff changes should contact Titles and Registration at (804) 367-1137 to schedule STARS training.
Selling a Vehicle When a state agency wants to sell a vehicle, the agency usually notifies DGS - Division of Surplus Property and turns the vehicle and title over to DGS. DGS sells vehicles and other property through auction or sealed bids. After the vehicle is sold, DGS notifies the agency. DGS also notifies DMV of the change in ownership and requests removal of the state registration for the vehicle from DMV's database. If an agency sells a vehicle without notifying DGS, the agency is responsible for notifying DMV. A surplus vehicle remains in the agency's inventory until DMV receives notification that it has been sold.
DGS provides all agencies and DMV with a list of sold vehicles after a sale by auction or sealed bids. After the sale or disposal, most agencies also report all state-owned vehicles to DMV for removal from its database. DMV uses the information from both DGS and the individual agencies to remove vehicles from state registration in its database.
Monitoring Driver Status A vehicle operator must have a valid driver's license to drive any state-owned vehicle. For temporary assignments or trip pool use, an employee must show the transportation officer a driver's license before using the vehicle.
All state agencies with long-term vehicle assignments should use the automated voluntary driving record program offered free to public organizations through DMV. This service monitors employee driving records and notifies the employer if the employee receives a DUI or reckless driving conviction or if driving privileges are suspended, revoked or disqualified. This will ensure agencies are aware of serious driving violations for employees that use state-owned vehicles and can help reduce the risk of accidents and liability for the Commonwealth.
Registered Farm Vehicles (F-tag) Vehicles that are registered for farming purposes can be used to transport: agricultural products to market or to other points for sale or processing materials, tools, equipment, or supplies that will be used or consumed on the farm anything incidental to the routine operation of the farm farm produce, supplies, equipment, or materials to another farm through a mutual agreement with the owner of the other farm forest products to the farm including forest materials originating on a farm or related to the regular operation of the farm forest products which originate on the farm Vehicles used on a tree farm are not eligible for farm registration unless the tree farm is also a nursery, a Christmas tree farm, or is part of what is otherwise a farm.
When you register your vehicle as a farm vehicle, you will be asked for information about your farm.
You will be asked to provide: location and acreage of the farm or farms type of commodity farmed and the approximate amounts produced annually a signed statement that the vehicle will be used only for authorized purposes The requirements for registering a vehicle as a farm vehicle To register a vehicle as a farm vehicle, the vehicle must have a gross weight of 7,500 pounds or more (Va. Code 46.2-698). Farm vehicles must also meet titling and insurance requirements.
Fees To register a vehicle for farming purposes you will pay one-half the registration fee paid for a private vehicle; however, your registration fee will be at least $15.00. (Va. Code 46.2-698)
Farm vehicle license plates issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles may be used on a vehicle used for farming purposes by anyone who owns, rents, or operates a farm of a size that reasonably requires the use of such a vehicle to transport agricultural products.
A farm vehicle using F-tags can be used for purposes other than farming. H however, non-farm use is limited to the personal use of the owner and his immediate family to attend church or school, to secure medical treatment or supplies, or to secure other household or family necessities.
Penalties Knowingly making a false statement on a registration application is a Class 6 felony. (Va. Code 46.2-605
Operating a vehicle bearing an F-tag for non-farm use on a Virginia highway is a Class 2 misdemeanor. (Va. Code 46.2-698(F).
Your farm vehicle has to be titled Every motor vehicle operated on a highway must be titled, even those exempt from registration. (Va. Code 46.2-600)
Insurance requirements for farm vehicles licensed with an F-tag When you register the vehicle, you must certify that it is insured or you must pay the $500 uninsured motor vehicle fee at the time of registration.(Va. Code 46.2-706)
You may need a commercial driver's license (CDL) to operate a registered farm vehicle
A CDL is required if your farm vehicle is operated 150 miles or more from your Virginia-based farm and meets the following definition of a commercial vehicle. has a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or more; or is a combination of vehicles with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more if the vehicle(s) being towed has a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds; or can carry 16 or more passengers including the driver; or requires hazardous material placards; or the vehicle is used in the operation of a contract or common carrier; or the vehicle is used in another state. (Additional licensing requirements may be required for out-of-state operation.)(Va. Code 46.2-341.4) Based on federal and state law, these vehicles require a pre-trip inspection. For additional information refer to the Virginia Commercial Driver's License Manual.
Cancelling the farm registration (F-tag) for a vehicle When a vehicle no longer qualifies for registration as a farm vehicle, notify DMV within 30 days or at the time of vehicle registration renewal, whichever comes first. You will need to replace your farm plates with appropriate license plates.(Va. Code 6.2-698(F)
Unregistered Farm Vehicles (Farm Use) You are not required to register a vehicle (obtain license plates and decals) or pay a registration fee for any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer used exclusively for agricultural or horticultural purposes on lands owned or leased by the vehicle's owner. This exemption applies only to vehicles that are not operated on or over any public highway for any purpose other than: crossing a highway operating along a highway for a distance of no more than thirty miles from one part of the owner's land to another, irrespective of whether the tracts adjoin taking the vehicle or attached fixtures to and from a repair shop for repairs taking another vehicle exempt from registration under any provision of Va. Code 46.2-664 through 46.2-668 or 46.2-672, or any part or subcomponent of such a vehicle, to or from a repair shop for repairs, including return trips operating along a highway to and from a refuse disposal facility for the purpose of disposing of trash and garbage generated on a farm operating along a highway for a distance of no more than thirty miles for the purpose of obtaining supplies for agricultural or horticultural purposes, seeds, fertilizers, chemicals, or animal feed. (Va. Code 46.2-665) You are not required to register or pay a registration fee for any vehicle with a securely attached machine for spraying fruit trees and other plants cultivated by the owner or lessee of the vehicle. (Va. Code 46.2-664)
You are not required to register or pay a registration fee for any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or fertilizer spreader drawn by a farm tractor used by a farmer, his tenant, agent or employee or a cotton ginner, peanut buyer, or fertilizer distributor to transport unginned cotton, peanuts, or fertilizer owned by the farmer, cotton ginner, peanut buyer, or fertilizer distributor from one farm to another, from farm to gin, from farm to dryer, from farm to market, or from fertilizer distributor to farm and on return to the distributor. However, this exemption does not apply to vehicles operated on a for-hire basis. (Va. Code 46.2-672)
You are not required to register or pay a registration fee for any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer owned by the owner or lessee of a farm and used by the owner on a seasonal basis in transporting farm produce and livestock along public highways for a distance of no more than thirty miles or the distance to the nearest storage house, packing plant, or market, provided it is no more than fifty miles away. (Va. Code 46.2-666)
You are not required to register or pay a registration fee for any farm machinery or tractor when operated on a highway (i) between one tract of land and another regardless of whether the land is owned by the same person or (ii) to and from a repair shop for repairs. (Va. Code 46.2-667)
You are not required to register or pay a registration fee for any farm vehicle if the vehicle is making a return trip from any marketplace, transporting back to the farm ordinary and essential food and other products for home and farm use, or transporting farm supplies to the farm. (Va. Code 46.2-673)
There are also exemptions for sawmill operators and farmers who transport wood products Tractors, trailers, log carts or similar vehicles owned by a sawmill operator are exempt from registration when the vehicle is operated along a highway from one sawmill or sawmill site to another, to or from a repair shop for repairs or across a highway from one adjoining tract of land to another. Va. Code 46.2-669 Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers owned by a farm owner are exempt from registration when they are used for no more than 20 miles between a sawmill or sawmill site and the farm to transport sawdust, wood shavings, slab wood, and other wood wastes. (Va. Code 46.2-670) Insurance requirements for unregistered farm vehicles Insurance may not be required for an unregistered vehicle; however, as the owner of the vehicle you may be held responsible for any liability. Check with your insurance agent about your insurance needs.
