Released in 1979, The Wall is a rock opera style concept double album from the seminal English rock band Pink Floyd. It has also been made into a film. The story of the album revolves around the character "Pink" (played by Bob Geldof in the film) and is in some part based on the personal life of Roger Waters, Pink struggles in life from an early age, loses his father in war, has an unhappy time at school due to being abused by teachers, has to deal with an overprotective mother and is deserted by his wife. The album tells the story of Pink's mental isolation from society showing tha Famous illustrator Gerald Scarfe designed the cover and gatefold sleeve, The story of The Wall begins in 1977 when Pink Floyd on their In The Flesh tour promoting their latest album Animals. The final night of the tour was in Montreal, Canada. A fan tried to climb over the netting between the audience and the stage to get up with the band and Waters spat in his face.This incident helped inspire Waters to develop the idea of The Wall.

Because of the English tax laws and to get the benefits of using cheap recording studios in France, The Wall was recorded at four studios over eight months. The atmosphere within the band at this time was tense. During the recording of The Wall, Waters sacked Richard Wright, and told him that he would have to leave straight after The Wall was finished. Waters was convinced that Wright was not contributing enough to the band and blamed his addiction to cocaine. Waters claimed that David Gilmour and Nick Mason had supported his decision to get rid of Wright, but in 2000, Gilmour stated that he and Mason were actually against the decision. Nick Mason later wrote a book called Inside Out in which he states that Wright was fired simply because Columbia Records had offered Waters a large bonus to finish the album quickly, for a 1979 release. Wright had refused to end his holiday early and return to finish the album. Wright did though return to the band for the live performances as a paid musician.

The Wall was first released on Colu mbia Records in the U.S. and Harvest Records in the UK, It was then re-released as a digitally remastered CD in 1994 in the UK on EMI . In 1997, Columbia Records issued an updated remaster in the United States, Canada, Australia, South America and Japan. For The Wall' s 20th Anniversary in April 2000, Capitol Records in the U.S. and EMI in Canada, Australia, South America and Japan re-released the 1997 remaster with the artwork from the EMI Europe remaster.

Self-imposed isolation is the main theme of the story and this is symbolized by the wall. The songs on the album create a storyline following the events in the life of Pink, much of which reflect the life of Waters himself. Waters's father was killed in Anzio during World War II, and we hear of Pink losing his father as a child in the war too in the track "Another Brick in the Wall (Part 1)", we learn of him being smothered by his overprotective mother in the track "Mother", and in The Happiest Days of Our Lives", we revisit his school days in the hands of tyrannical, abusive teachers, each of these traumatic events in his life become "another brick in the wall". Pink grows up to become a rock star, but he struggles with relationships and is prone to episodes of violence. His marriage falls apart which is the final brick in the wall, completing his isolation from the world.

Pink now deteriorates fast behind the wall. He is now prone to hallucinations and believes that he is a fascist Hitler style dictator. His concerts now become like Neo-Nazi rallies. He sets his men on fans he considers unworthy. However his conscience rebels at this and he puts himself on trial. He is judged by his inner self who sentences him to "tear down the wall". He needs to allow the outside world in again, and make amends to his friends that he has hurt badly. The album ends as it begins, showing the cyclical nature of life and behavior. Bob Ezrin actually wrote a script for the album to clarify the story line and even asked for extra songs to make the plot complete.

The Gerald Scarfe cover art and custom picture labels also bond with the concept theme . Side one shows a quarter of the wall erected and a sketch of the teacher. Side two has half of the wall erected and a sketch of the wife. Side three sees three-quarters of the wall erected and a sketch of the character of Pink, and side four has the wall completely erected and a sketch of the judge.

The Wall was an instant hit and soon reached number one on the Billboard 200 in the U.S and number three in the UK. Worldwide sales are estimated at 15 million copies.

The film version o f The Wall , directed by Alan Parker and starring Bob Geldof was released in 1982 and was simply called Pink Floyd The Wall. Roger Waters wrote t he screenplay himself, The film features music from the album. much Many tracks were re-recorded by the band with additional orchestration and some lyrical and musical changes to help it fit better with the film. Originally the film was going to be inter cut with concert footage,but this idea was dropped in the end.

Let us now look at the tracks on the album.The first track "In the Flesh?" is named after the 1977 tour of the same name, though without the question mark, during which Roger Waters spat in frustration at a fan attempting to climb the fence. An incident he has since said inspired the writing of The Wall. This song sets up the cyclical nature of the album, as the track begins with the words '...we came in?' This only makes sense if you listen to the album on a loop, as the last track on the album end with the words 'Isn't this where...".

The song signifies the beginning of the show narrated by Pink. It is made clear that Pink is going to tell us the story of the building of The Wall. We hear that despite how things look, things are very different "behind these cold eyes" and if you want to discover how things really are then you'll have to claw your way through the disguise. Sound effects of a WWII plane indicate the death of Pink's father.

In the film version we see Pink sitting in a hotel room. A crowd break into the room and the music gets suddenly louder. We then see news footage of riots which will make an appearance again later in the show.Next we see the death of Pink's father as a bunker being bombed in the war.

This song in the film is also often thought of as a birth or a beginning. The hotel room a womb. We see him, unmoving in a fetal position. The crowd rushing through narrow corridor can be thought of as symbolising ejaculation, and the scene and the song ends with a new-born baby crying.We also hear the heart beat sound fromThe Dark Side of the Moon which is first heard as the first words on thetrack are spoken.

Next up we have "Another Brick in the Wall (Part I)". This is the first of three songs set to variations of the same theme. Part I, Part II, and Part III. All of which were written by Roger Waters. Each of the parts has a very similar tune and lyrical structure, but the words differ between each version. Each part is progressively louder and angrier than the one that preceded it. Part I has a sad feeling to it, Part II is protest, and Part III is pure fury. You find aspects of this song in nearly all the other songs on the album too.

In Part 1 the thin ice of the previous song breaks when Pink grows up and begins to understand about the death of his father. Pink is devastated by this and starts to build The Wall.

In the film we see Pink's mother praying in a church after the death of her husband during the war. Pink is too young to understand at this point and plays happily with a toy plane. Next we see Pink playing in a park alone. Pink sees a boy and his father and joins them, the man and his son play with him for a while, but Pink becomes too clingy and he is pushed away. He doesn't understand why and is left feeling dejected.

For the next track " Another Brick in the Wall (Part II)", Pink Floyd needed a school choir. They were recording at Britannia Row Studios which was very near to Islington Green School. The music teacher Alun Renshaw agreed to let the school choir work on the album. Interestingly the chorus was overdubbed tw elve times to make it sound like the choir was bigger than it actually was. The choir were not allowed to hear the rest of the song after singing the chorus. The school did not have any royalty arrangement, but did receive a payment of £1000. However under the 1996 UK copyright law, the choir became eligible for royalties. Royalties agent Peter Rowan of RBL Music tracked down the choir members through the website Friends Reunited, and they sued. It was stimated that each student would be owed around £500 in royalties.

Because of how the songs merge together the version released as a single has a guitar intro that isn't present on the album. The song features strong drums, a well-known bass line, distinctive guitar parts in the background and a guitar solo. The song also features a school children on vocals in the second verse and towards the end of the song we hear the sounds of the playground along with the constantly irate teacher. We then hear a phone ringing and the song ends with a sigh.

"Empty Spaces" segues seemlessly into the next track "Young Lust". David Gilmour sings this track, but Waters performs backing vocals. By this point has become a rock star, often away from home. His wife is out of his mind and his hotel rooms are full of groupies.

Towards the end of the song we hear Pink talking to the operator on the telephone. He finds out that his wife is having an affair. Interestingly the operators reaction is genuine. They were not told the call was being recorded and they did actually believe he'd caught his wife having an affair. Apparently it took three attempts to get an operator who actually worked out what was going on. In the film at this point, we see groupies offering sexual favours to the guards to get past them to visit Pink. The events in the film are in a slightly different order to that on the album, so we see Pink in a slightly more sympathetic light.

The next track, "Don't Leave Me Now", is one of the saddest songs on the whole album. We hear Pink channel hopping on the TV as he falls further into depression. He begs his wife not to leave him, but still shows her much anger. Waters, when interviewed, said that although a lot of the content of the album was based on his own experiences, his break up with his own wife was a lot more amicable than that between Pink and his wife.

In the film, the song starts with a view of the wreckage of the trashed hotel room. Next we see Pink floating in a crucifix shape in the hotel pool. We see the blood pour from the cut in his hand that he sustained while throwing the television out of the window and it colours the water in the pool.Next we Pink watching the film The Dam Busters. The shadow of Pink's wife is projected onto the wall, then it turns first into a praying mantis, and then a flower shaped like a vulva. Towards the end of the song we see Pink hiding in the corner of the room, clearly distressed by the images he is seeing, and his wife's adultery.

This is followed by the third and final part of "Another Brick in the Wall". In his anger he decides to complete his wall. He believes he doesn't need anyone in his life at all and wishes to be totally isolated behind the wall. In the film, we see a series of images that remind us of all the events in his life that have led him to this point. We see all the bricks that have built the wall.

In the next song, "In The Flesh", we hear the first in a series of songs within which Pink, in his drug-induced madness, likens himself to a dictator figure. His concerts take the form of a political rally, and he set his men on fans he considers unworthy which includes homosexuals, a Jew, a black person, someone with spots, someone smoking marijuana, and a man he simply takes a dislike to.

In "Waiting for the Worms" Pink has given up. The worms represent bad thoughts and ideals and he has let them take over. His fascist dictator hallucinations continue,he sees it as his mission to spread hatred. In the film version we see an animated sequence with marching hammers.

The album took on extra meaning when the Berlin Wall fell in 1990. Roger Waters played a huge concert in part of the former no-man's land of the Berlin Wall. The show featured a 550-foot long and 82-foot high wall, which was broken down during the show. The concert sold out with over 250,000 people attending, and just before the performance started the gates were opened so another 200,000 people could watch. The performance of "The Trial" was especially notable as it had live actors playing the parts. Albert Finney was the Judge, Tim Curry was the prosecutor and Thomas Dolby played the teacher, hanging from the wall.


