There are few things which you can do to prevent cervical cancer and pre-cancers.

Avoid beingexposed to HPV: Most of the cervical pre-cancers can be prevented by avoiding exposure to HPV. There are certain types of sexual behavior which increase the risk of a woman of getting HPV infection such as:
Started having sex at an early age Having many sexual partners Having a partner who is having many sexual partners Having sex with uncircumcised males

Delay sex: Delaying the age of starting sex can be helpful in avoiding HPV infection. It also helps to limit your number of sexual partnersand to avoid having sex with someone who has had many other sexualpartners. Many people may have HPV for years without any symptoms. They may keep it passing to many people unknowingly.

Use condoms: Use of condoms may be protective against HPV infection. One study reported that correct use of condoms may lower the HPVinfection rate by almost 70% - if it is used with each and every sexual act. Condoms cannot be completely protective as they don't cover all the HPV-infected areas of body such as skin of the genital or anal area. Still, condoms provide some protection against HPV, and they also protect against HIV and some other sexually transmitted diseases.

Avoid smoking: Avoiding smoking is an important way of reducing the risk of cervical pre-cancer and cancer.


Get vaccinated: Vaccines have been developed which can protect women from HPV infections. Till now, a vaccine which protects against HPV types 6, 11, 16 and 18 (Gardasil®) and another vaccinne which protects against types 16 and 18 (Cervarix®) have been studied.

Gardasil® has been approved by the FDA. A series of 3 injections over a 6-month period needs to be given. The second injection is given 2 months after the first one, and the third is given 4 months after the second. The common side effects are short-term redness, swelling, and soreness at the injection site. Clinical trials have shown that Gardasil can prevent genital warts caused by HPV types 6 and 11 and also prevent pre-cancers and cancers of the cervix caused by HPV types 16and 18. The vaccine can only prevent HPV infection and cannot be used for treating already existing HPV infection.

To be most effective, the HPV vaccine should be given before aperson starts having sex. The Federal Advisory Committee onImmunization Practices (ACIP) has recommended that the vaccine be givenroutinely to females aged 11 to 12. It can be given to younger females(as young as age 9) at the discretion of doctors. ACIP also recommendedwomen ages 13 to 26 who have not yet been vaccinated get "catch-up"vaccinations.

The American Cancer Society also recommends that the vaccinebe routinely given to females aged 11 to 12 and as early as age 9 yearsat the discretion of doctors. The Society also agrees that"catch-up" vaccinations should be given to femalesaged 13 to 18. The independent panel making the Society recommendationsfound that there was not enough proof of benefit to recommend catch-upvaccination for every woman aged 19 to 26 years. As a result, the American Cancer Society recommends that women aged 19 to 26 talk withtheir health care provider about the risk of previous HPV exposure and potential benefit from vaccination before deciding to get vaccinated.Research is now being done on using Gardasil in older women and inmales. The American Cancer Society guideline focuses on Gardasil at this time. As new information on Cervarix®,Gardasil®,and other new products becomes available, these guidelines will be updated.

Gardasil is expensive - the vaccine series costs around $360 (not including any doctor's fee or the cost of giving theinjections). It should be covered by most medical insurance plans (if given according to ACIP guidelines). It should also be covered bygovernment programs that pay for vaccinations in children under 18.Because this vaccine costs so much, you may want to check your coveragewith your insurance company first.

It is important to realize that the vaccine doesn't protect against all cancer-causing types of HPV, so routine Pap tests are still necessary. One other benefit of the vaccine is that it protects against the 2 viruses that cause 90% of genital warts.



The test has been named after its developer George Papanicolaou, M.D. In this procedure cells from your cervix are collected and Getting regular Pap smears done substantially decrease the chances of developing cervical cancer. But even if you develop cervical cancer, the chances of a cure are as high as 90 percent - if discovered early. The Pap smear is the best tool to detect cervical cancer in its earliest stage.

Reliability and Accuracy of Pap Smear



The cells viewed in a cervical smear sample are classified on a scale representing the spectrum of cell changes from normal to cancerous. The smear is first characterized as either "normal" or "abnormal."

If abnormal cells have been identified, the depending on the report doctor has to decide whether the patient needs only repeat Pap smears, a test for the HPV virus, or colposcopy is needed to further investigate the patient. The abnormal cells have been further divided into categories, depending on the degree of abnormality. This is based on the 2001 Bethesda System (TBS) which is formulated to standardize the reporting of Pap test results.

Epithelial Cell Abnormalities: Squamous Cell

Atypical Squamous Cells of Undetermined Significance. The atypicalsquamous cells of undetermined significance (ASCUS) category is restricted to those slides in which the cellular changes exceed those that can be attributedto reactive or reparative processes, but that fall short of a definitivediagnosis of a squamous intraepithelial lesion. The report should be furtherqualified, if possible, to indicate whether a reactive process or a squamous intraepithelial lesion is favored. Hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, and dys-keratosis are descriptors that are not included in abnormal pap smear.

The ASCUS category remains controversial. In August 1992, the National Cancer Institute Early Detection Branch invited clinical experts to participate in a workshop to develop interim guidelines for the management of women with abnormal cervical cytology. This workshop concluded that an ASCUS report should be expected.

Low-Grade Squamous Intraepithelial Lesion. The category of low-gradesquamous intraepithelial lesion encompasses human papillomavirus (HPV) and milddysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) I. The inclusion of thecellular changes supportive of HPV infection (previously termed koilocytosis,koilocytotic atypia, or condylomatous atypia) in the category of low-gradesquamous intraepithelial lesion requires that the diagnosis be based on specificcellular criteria to avoid overinterpretation of non-specific artifactualchanges mimicking koilocytosis. A cytoplasmic halo without the typical "raisinoid"eccentric nucleus should not be interpreted as koilocytosis.

Cellular changes associated with HPV are included in the category of low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion because the natural history and cytologic features of both HPV and CIN I (mild dysplasia) lesions are similar. Long-term follow-up studies have shown that 14% of lesions previously classified as koilocytosis.

High-Grade Intraepithelial Lesion. The category of high-grade intraepithelial lesion encompasses moderate and severe dysplasia, carcinoma in situ/CIN II, and CIN III. The rationale for combining CIN II and CIN 11I into the category of high-grade intraepithelial lesion is also based on biologic and virologic studies. The HPV mix of the two lesions is similar, and the separation of the two lesions has been irreproducible in inter- and intraobserver studies.

Glandular Cell Abnormalities

Endometrial Cells. The presence of endometrial cells, cytologically benign, in a postmenopausal woman not receiving exogenous hormones should be investigated even when the cells are normal in appearance. Such cells may be associated with inadvertent sampling of the lower uterine segment, endometrial polyps, endometrial hyperplasia.

Atypical Glandular Cells of Undetermined Significance. The term"atypical glandular cells of undetermined significance'' is used to reportchanges beyond those encountered in the benign reactive processes butinsufficient for a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. The report should indicatewhether the cells are thought to be of endocervical or endometrial origin, whenpossible.

Adenocarcinoma. A report of adenocarcinoma indicates a probable invasivetumor. The report should specify whether an endometrial, endocervical, orextrauterine site is suspected.



A Pap Smear results may simply be described as "abnormal." Even the cells which appear abnormal on Pap Smear examination, they are very rarely cancerous. Patients should be explained that all abnormal conditions do not always progress into cancer, and some conditions are more likely to progress to cancer than others. A woman must always ask her doctor about the specific information in her Pap test result and its meaning.

There are several terms that may be used to describe abnormal results.

Dysplasia is a term used to describe abnormal cells. Dysplasia is not cancer, although it may develop into very early cancer of the cervix. The cells look abnormal under the microscope, but they do not invade nearby healthy tissue. There are four degrees of dysplasia, classified as mild, moderate, severe, or carcinoma in situ, depending on how abnormal the cells appear under the microscope. Carcinoma in situ means that abnormal cells are present only in the layer of cells on the surface of the cervix. However, these abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby healthy tissue.

Squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL) is another term that is used to describe abnormal changes in the cells on the surface of the cervix. The word squamous describes thin, flat cells that form the outer surface of the cervix. The word lesion refers to abnormal tissue. An intraepithelial lesion means that the abnormal cells are present only in the layer of cells on the surface of the cervix. A doctor may describe SIL as being low-grade (early changes in the size, shape, and number of cells) or high-grade (precancerous cells that look very different from normal cells). Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) is another term that is sometimes used to describe abnormal tissue findings. Neoplasia means an abnormal growth of cells. Intraepithelial refers to the layer of cells that form the surface of the cervix. The term CIN, along with a number (1 to 3), describes how much of the thickness of the lining of the cervix contains abnormal cells. Atypical squamous cells are findings that are unclear, and not a definite abnormality.

Cervical cancer, or invasive cervical cancer, occurs when abnormal cells spread deeper into the cervix or to other tissues or organs.




HPV's Role In Cervical Dysplasia and Cancer

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a sexually transmitted disease. The relationship between HPV infection and cervical cancer is known for decades. Over 100 types of HPV are known, and 13 to 15 of these are linked to cervical cancer. The subtype 16 (HPV-16) is associated with \the highest risk for cervical cancer. Low-risk types that affect the genital tract usually manifest as genital warts. HPV is found in 99.7% of invasive cervical cancers and cancer/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia contains 1 of 13 oncogenic types. Millions of women in the United States and worldwide harbor HPV, but only a fraction develops cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or cancer. The prevalence of high-risk HPV infection is highest in women 20 to 24 years of age (24%) and decreases with age. When women older than 30 years of age have high-risk HPV infection, there is an increased risk for the development of high-grade lesions and cancer; women with persistent high-risk HPV infections are the population at greatest risk for developing cancer. Approximately 90% of HPV infections resolve within 2 years. Clinical progression to CIN 3 is mostly seen with high-risk HPV.

DNA Testing and Clinical Utility in Triage: There are several methods for HPV DNA testing. The mist commonly used method in clinical use is Hybrid capture (Hybrid Capture 2, Digene Corp, Gaithersburg, MD). By this method low- and high-risk subtypes can be separated. DNA testing was found to have greater sensitivity in detecting CIN 3 or more advanced lesions and showed specificity comparable to a single additional cytologic test indicating ASC-US or greater. DNA testing for HPV is an important tool in the management of women with an ASC-US cytologic diagnosis. Other issues that may impact the clinical utility of HPV testing include: HPV-16 in normal cytology is the highest predictor of subsequent development of CIN. In women 29 years of age or older, HPV testing is 94% sensitive for CIN 3 and more advanced lesions, with a 31% rate of colposcopy referral. This equates to a 30% reduction in the rate of referral compared with HPV testing in younger women. Only 15% of women infected with an oncogenic HPV type with negative cytology will develop an abnormal Pap within 5 years; however, this risk increases with greater viral load. Women with negative cytology and negative HPV test results have a very low risk (0.16%) of developing CIN 3 over the next 45 months.




The strong correlation between infection with high-risk types of HPV and LSIL, HSIL, and cervical cancer suggests that HPV DNA testing would be a useful tool for the management of women with abnormal Pap test results, especially in the case of those with equivocal test results. In the case of an equivocal Pap test result, HPV DNA testing can help determine whether the individual should be referred for colposcopic assessment. In 2001, the National Cancer Institute completed a large multicenter randomized trial called the Atypical Squamous Cell of Undermined Significance/Low Grade Squamous Intraepithelial Lesion Triage Study (ALTS). The study compared immediate colposcopy, HPV DNA testing by Hybrid Capture 2, and repeat cytology in the management of women with ASC-US and LSIL cytology. The study showed that 83% of women with LSIL cytology tested positive for high-risk HPV DNA, limiting the usefulness and the cost-effectiveness of HPV testing in differentiating which women with LSIL cytology should undergo colposcopy. In women with ASC-US cervical cytology screening results, ALTS found that triage using liquid-based cytology alone had a sensitivity of 85% for CIN 2 and CIN 3 lesions while referring 59% of women to colposcopy following the first repeat cervical cytology screening and 67% following the second repeat cervical cytology screening. Human papillomavirus testing detected more than 90% of CIN 2 and CIN 3 while referring only 56% of the patients to colposcopy. Both HPV testing and repeat cytology referred more women younger than 30 years to colposcopy than older women, but HPV testing was significantly more sensitive for CIN 2 and CIN 3 at all ages (7). Testing for HPV DNA has clinical relevance for predicting the risk of the presence of CIN 2/3+ and the risk of the development of CIN 2/3+. The American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP) consensus conference recommended that HPV DNA testing could be used as a test of cure for women with CIN 2 or CIN 3 at least 6 months following excision or ablation of the transformation zone. The women with high-risk HPV would be referred for colposcopy.


Invader HPV Test as a New Screening Assay HPV typing and colposcopy are ancillary tests for patients with an abnormal cervical cytology, while cervical biopsy for the demonstration of CIN3 remains the only diagnostic test for cervical neoplasia. Colposcopy is invasive and expensive and can miss one-third of CIN3 lesions. Although HPV has been implicated in etiology of cervical cancer, all types of HPV do not have same degree of carcinogenecity. In the etiology of cervical cancer fifteen oncogenic or high-risk (HR) strains of HPV have been implicated. Of these HR HPV types, HPV type 16 (HPV 16) and HPV 18 are etiologically associated with CIN3 and invasive cervical carcinomas (CIN lesions of grade 3 or higher) in 60% and 10 to 20% of specimens, respectively (17). The report of ASCUS LSIL Triage Study Group showed that the 2-year cumulative absolute risk for CIN lesions of grade 3 or higher is 32.5% for HPV 16-positive ASCUS specimens, which raises a clinical urgency.
Identifying HPV 16 and 18 may play an important role in the risk stratification of patients with ASCUS for further monitoring and heightened follow-up as the persistence of HPV infection is frequently associated with these two strains.


Clinically, the Inv2 test detects 14 oncogenic HPV types and segregates the viruses into three groups according to the results obtained with separate probe sets, thus allowing the selection of women for whom further subtyping is needed. In this study, cervical samples were submitted in SurePath ethanol-based transport medium, with DNA extractions for Inv2 testing obtained by semiautomated methods. SurePath medium has been increasingly popular as a liquid fixative for gynecologic cytology; moreover, screening for HPV from a liquid fixative is rapidly growing as an important testing modality for cancer prevention. For the Inv2 assay, H2be serves as an internal control and ensures that informative DNA is extracted from the specimen. In this study, the extractions for the Inv2 assay were "clean"; that is, the semiautomated extraction resulted in a low level of extraneous background DNA and provided quality specimen DNA. Approximately 50% of ASCUS specimens demonstrate HR HPV infections (7). Algorithmically, the need for clinical follow-up for ASCUS is considerably intensified by a positive screen for HR HPV. Most contemporary HPV tests that indicate positive results for HPV do not yet specifically identify HPV 16 and 18, nor do they indicate the level of inherent patient risk when the assay results are positive. As one approach to the recently recognized need for a level of specificity for HPV 16 and 18 in cervical cytology specimens, we examined a new and yet undescribed HPV screening assay, the second-generation Invader HPV (Inv2) assay (Third Wave Technologies, Inc., Madison, WI). The Inv2 assay screens for HPV DNA and subgroups the HR HPV types with three separate HR HPV-specific probe sets. The Inv2 assay is available as analyte-specific reagents (ASRs) and provides a potentially semiautomated, high-throughput system for the detection of 14 HR HPV types. According to the manufacturer of the Inv2 assay ASRs, the Inv2 assay is similar to the first-generation Invader HPV HR assay but with the addition of a probe for HR HPV 66. The Inv2 assay HR HPV-specific probe sets include A5/A6 (HPV 51, 56, and 66), A7 (HPV 18, 39, 45, 59, and 68), and A9 (HPV 16, 31, 33, 35, 52, and 58). Positivity for probes A9 and A7 is suggestive of the presence of HPV 16 and 18, respectively. The Inv2 assay features an internal positive control through the detection of the human histone-2, or H2be, gene, ensuring the quality of the DNA and informative results for specimens with negative assay results.

The specificity of assays for HPV subtypes is now a major concern, namely, because patients may be subjected to unnecessary stress and procedures secondary to false-positive results for HR types. The HC2 HPV screening assay detects at least 15 HPV genotypes not included in its HR probe set. It may be argued that it is important to detect HPV with sensitivity, irrespective of specificity; however, this may not attend to the caveats of risk and the economic cost associated with a false-positive test result. Specificity for HR HPV and the associated clinical implications-the need for close follow-up, including colposcopy-are relevant issues which suggest that a high sensitivity and a high specificity are paramount to clinical acumen. The Inv2 and HC2 tests appear to demonstrate similar sensitivities, although the Inv2 test may offer an improvement in specificity. According to the results from this study, the Inv2 test offers a reliable means of grouping of HR HPV types, which offers potential advantage in triaging of patients for follow-up for possible HPV 16 and 18 infections. In this study, the extraction phase for Inv2 testing for high throughput was semiautomated. Otherwise, the LA-PCR allows the specific recognition of individual types within both low-risk and HR HPV groups, although the test remains unavailable for clinical use at this time. In its present format, the application of PCR-LA would be problematic (because of strip hybridization) for high throughput.

After characterizing the Inv2 assay, it can be stated that the assay appears to be simple to perform, can be used with the SurePath fixative, DNA extraction can be done by semiautomated method, and shows a good sensitivity and a good specificity for ASCUS cytology cases. For routine surveillance for HPV, the Inv2 test appears to be potentially useful as a first-line test for screening for HPV. The Inv2 test demonstrates few false-positive results without compromising the sensitivity of detection of critical HPV types, including HPV 16 and 18. Patients positive by the Inv2 test with the A9 and/or A7 probe set may warrant further close follow-up and/or testing for possible HPV 16 and 18 infection.