there's something for everyone in Dutchess County. The temperatures in the county range from around 38 to 60F.

There are so many great things about the Hudson River Valley. The people are friendly, the scenery is lush and green and there are lots of stunning lakes, streams and rivers close by. There is a wealth of fun and educational historical sites. Dutchess County had many parks and many of them have no entrance fee. A trip to Dutchess County needn't cost you a lot of cash.



Perhaps you're a wine lover? Dutchess County has a fabulous wine trail that will lead you Perhaps you are more of an outdoors person than a wine drinker? If so, then there is plenty for you to do in Dutchess County too.

If hiking sounds a bit energetic, then how about a Segway tour. With just thirty minutes instruction you will be travelling serenely and noiselessly along the beautiful shores of the Hudson River.

Segway of the Hudson Valley has come to Dooley Square at the end of Main Street in Poughkeepsie, near the train station and is run by Jack Whiteand his son Jason. Riding a Segway is a lot of fun and the training is simple and easy to follow. The tours are around six miles long and last around two hours, so you get to see a lot of great scenery. The maximum speed of the Segway is twelve miles per hour, but you'll be travelling at around six miles per hour.



Let us look at the Tours in more detail so you can plan your trip in advance.



Drive Tour #1: This trip covers Rhinebeck, Red Hook and Milan which are some of the earliest settled communities in the county. On this drive you'll pass through beautiful meadows and woodlands and you'll see some stunning mountain views. There are also several historic sites on the route too. Rhinebeck offers some great views, forest preserves, gatehouses and orchards. At Red Hook you can visit Bard College, an artistic center with a gorgeous Hudson River campus which includes two impressive former estates. In Milan you experience rural landscapes and some great views of the many historic monuments in the area, such as the neo-Colonial Revival town hall. Driv e Tour #2: Tour 2 takes you through Hyde Park, Clinton and Pleasant Valley. In Hyde Park you could stop off at The Culinary Institute of America's five award-wining restaurants. Also in this area are the The Franklin D. Roosevelt and Eleanor Rooseveltnational historic sites where you can visit the former president's family estate, his library and archives and the rose garden graves where he and Eleanor are buried. The Eleanor Roosevelt home at Val-Kill is their former weekend retreat situated in 180 wooded acres. This tour is forty miles long and takes in the hamlet of Staatsburg, a Quaker-settled town of Clinton. you'll also pass mill sites along Little Wappinger Creek and the village of Pleasant Valley.

Drive Tour #3: This tour covers the Poughkeepsie and LaGrange area On this trip you'll see rural churches and cemeteries,colleges and schoolhouses and muchhistoric farmland. On this journey you'll get to cross the Mid-Hudson Suspension Bridge which is an experience itself. The Samuel Morse Historic Site is also on this route.

Drive Tour #4: This tour covers fifty miles of Wappinger, Fishkill, East Fishkill and Beacon, in the south of Dutchess County. Wappinger has the only village green in the county. In Fishkill you can visit the Madam Brett Homestead, the oldest house in the county which is a Dutch farmhouse built around 1709. The Fishkill Village Historic District contains residential and commercial architecture spanning three centuries.

Drive Tour #5: This route takes in Union Vale, Beekman, Pawling and Dover in the south east of the county. This area is filled with small towns and farmland dating from the18th century, built as a result of the growth of the iron mines and 19th century railroad expansions.

Drive Tour #6:

At 65 miles long this is the longest of the tours and it's well worth the extra time and distance!

You will see some of the most outstanding views in the whole of the United States. You'll visit teh rolling countryside of Pine Plains, Northeast, Amenia, Washington and Stanford, filled with pretty hamlets and their treasure trove of shops and restaurants. You may well see rare livestock breeds such as Dutch Belted Galloway cattle on this route. The tour also features the Millbrook School which you may recognise as it has been a backdrop in several major films. Institute for Ecosystems Studies' Mary Flagler Cary Arboretum with nature trails, gardens and exhibits.

Bike tour #1: This 60 mile tour passes right through the centre of a Hudson River Valley National Heritage Area. You'll begin in Hyde Park, where you can take in the Franklin D. Roosevelt and Eleanor Roosevelt national historic sites, Wilderstein, Montgomery Place, the mansions of Frederick and Louise Vanderbilt and Ogden and Ruth Livingston Mills. You will pass through Rhinebeck, a beautiful village the Beekman Arms, America's oldest continually operating inn. If you visit on a weekend you may be able to catch an antique air show at the Old Rhinebeck Aerodrome too.

Bike tour #2: Tour number 2 is a twenty seven mile trip that akes in Pleasant Valley, Clinton Corners and Schultzville. You will pass through some of Dutchess County's finest scenery. A great place to stop is at the Clinton Vineyards where you can go on a tour, taste award-winning wines and eat your lunch in one of the picturesque picnic areas. You'll pass plenty of places on the way to pick up some picnic food.

Bike tour #3: Is a 39 mile route that passes through Pleasant Valley, Millbrook, Verbank and Clinton Corners. There are some great places to stop such as the Mary Flagler Cary Arboretum or the Innisfree Garden, home to Chinese style tea cup gardens that are over a thousand years old. In Millbrook you can visit the antique shopping and the great farmer's market.

Bike Tour #4: This 25 mile tour takes in the sights of the Harlem Valley area. It starts conveniently at the Dover Plains train station so it's highly convenient if you are visiting from New York City as you can simply take your bike on the Harlem Valley rail line. Highlights include the historic village of Pawling which is full of unique small stores and restaurants, and the Webatuck Craft Village. Webatuck is a working craft village with buildings dating from the 18th century.On your journey you'll be treated to some stunning views of the Ten Mile River.

Bike Tour #5: This tour also covers the Harlem Valley but takes a different route from Bike Tour #4/ This 30 mile journey also starts at the Dover Plains train station and passes through Millerton, Wassaic, Amenia, Leedsville, Amenia Union and South Amenia.As a cyclist you're bound to enjoy the traffic-free 4 mile stretch on the Harlem Valley Rail Trail . Stopping at Millerton is a must. Here you can visit country stores, antique shops and crafts stores such as Gilmor Glassworks .



the Hudson River Adventures sightseeing cruises. These river c ruises on the "Pride Of The Hudson" last for two hours and you'll start and end your journey at Newburgh Landing, Front Street, Newburgh. The cruise heads south on the Hudson River taking in Mount Beacon, Bannerman Island and Castle, and Breakneck Mountain as well as Storm King Mountain, Catskill Water Aqueduct, Cold Spring and Worlds End. At the northern part of the US Military Academy at West Point the ship returns north. On the outward journey you will be treated to a historical talk about all the sights you are passing.

You can buy your tickets in advance or you can purchase them at dock one hour before the cruise starts. T here is a large sundeck up top with a cozy bow area and the main enclosed deck is climate controlled. There is also a bar for drinks and snacks.Choose from a daytime or sunset cruise, you may even wish to do both.



The Mid-Hudson Children's Museum in Poughkeepsie is a must. Here you'll find over 50 interactive exhibits where children can learn about simple machines through IBM's exhibit of 20 working models of da Vinci's 16th century inventions and meet a 15-foot dinosaur. There are exhibits about outer space, health, geography, music, art and banking. It's educational and a lot of fun. There are extra activities that change daily, so each visit is differen, and there's a special exhibit area for toddlers

so your kids will have a great time, whatever their ages.

If shopping is more your style, then of course Dutchess County has plenty to offer in that department too. How about a trip to the Stormville Flea Market?

A visit to the Buttercup Farm Sanctuary makes for a great day out. Buttercup Farm is located in the northeastern corner of Dutchess County south of Pine Plains. More than 500 acres in size, Buttercup Farm covers an area of over five hundred acres of diverse habitats with open grasslands and woodland and marsh. There are six miles of trails for you to explore. You can see over eighty different species of birds, including nesting Great Blue Herons, Wood Ducks, Bobolinks, Golden-winged and Lawrence's Warblers. The Sanctuary is open seven days a week from dawn until dusk and it is completely free of charge.



In Dutchess County there are theatrical, dance and music performances all year round, including concerts by the talented Hudson Valley Philharmonic orchestra. Maestro Randall Craig Fleisher conducts six symphony concerts between October and May, and special guests perform at the pops concerts in the holidays . Dutchess has the oldestworking theater in New York State, the Bardavon, which was built in 1869 and has been beautifully restored. The theatre is a National Historic Site and offers a full season of theater, dance, music, opera, children's shows and other special events. A Film Series shows classic films as they should be seen which is always preceded by a concert on the Wurlitzer Theater organ which has been restored by volunteers. You could also visit the Richard C. Fisher Center for the Performing Arts, a stunning two theater performance venue designed by the famous architect Frank Gehry. The center is located on Bard College's campus and consists of a 900 seat concert hall and a 300 seat black box theater offering a wide array of events such as music, dance and drama. There are festivals to. A summer arts festival, called Summerscape, and the annual Bard Music Festival, with the American Symphony Orchestra in residence . Upstate Films in Rhinebeck, has been showing independent, foreign and classic films from around the world since 1972 and has recently undergone a major expansion and renovation. Upstate Films have two screening rooms and you'll find them conveniently located on Rte. 9. If you have an interest in fine arts you will be able to see works of art from ancient times to modern art at fine college art galleries and the Dia:Beacon Riggio Gallery, a museum for Dia Art Foundation's famous collection of art from the 1960s to the present day. The museum is sited in a historic printing facility located on the Hudson River in Beacon, New York, occupying a space of some 300,000 square feet. Here you will see works from artists such as Andy Warhol, On Kawara, Agnes Martin, Joseph Beuys, Donald Judd and Richard Serra.

When the Dia:Beacon opened in 2003 their followed a growth in art studios and galleries in Beacon, specializing in all areas of art and crafts. Hudson Beach Glass, located in an 1890 firehouse is an interesting place to visit as you watch glassblowing there.



Autumn is a great time to visit Dutchess Countym when the leaves turn colour. For something a little different, how about a visit to the county's haunted houses, If you're visiting Dutchess County overnight or for a longer break then you will need somewhere to stay, and there is somewhere to

cater to every taste and mood. Choose from elegant B&Bs, quaint country style inns, motels, suite hotels and major hotel chains. Or if you prefer an outdoor experience you can camp at several public and private parks and campgrounds.

You won't go hungry in Dutchess County either. There are some great places for Dutchess County has a reputation for fine food that extends beyond The Culinary Insititute of America though. Here are some suggestions for amazing places to dine out.


Harralds Restaurant - Harralds Restaurant is in Stormville and has been awarded an AAA a Four Diamond award.
Allyn's Restaurant - Allyn's Restaurant can be found in Millbrook, the heart of hunt country, serving American and continental cuisine.
The Inn at Osborne Hill - this restaurant is run by a husband and wife team of Institute graduates and serves up a selection of continental meals
Le Pavillon - r egional French fare served in cosy dining rooms inside a brick country home. The owner and chef Claude Guermont was chef-instructor at The Culinary Institute of Americafor six years before he opened the restaurant. He has alsowritten a book entitled "Normandy Table,".

The Old Drovers Inn - this Inn can be found in Dover Plains and is listed in the Relais & Chateaux guide.The stunning Colonial stone and wood house dates back to 1750 and was once was a stopover for cowboys or drovers as they were known. The restaurant serves seafood, seasonal game and many outstanding classic dishes in a beautiful relaxing setting with roaring open fires. They also have a great wine list. It's no surprise that they have been awarded the AAA Four Diamond award.

Cosimo's Trattoria and Bar - This Trattoria in Poughkeepsie has an elegant modern feel to it and a good wine list. The staff are experts on wine and are always on hand to help you pick the right bottle to complement your food. The wine is displayed on shelves around the restaurant.

GiGi Trattoria - GiGi Trattoria can be found in Rhinebeck and serves delicious traditional Italian dishes made from the best fresh ingredients from the Hudson Valley. The restaurant feels sophisticated yet informal. The prices are very reasonable and the service is great too.

There is also a wealth of cafes, bistros and pubs throughout the county.

There are many hidden gems within the villages of the region, so exploring the area can really pay off.

The Hyde Park Brewing Company is a micro brewery in Hyde Park and is also worth a visit to sample their craft-brewed ales and lagers.

As well as American, French, and continental gourmet restaurants, you will also find a good selection of Japanese restaurants that serve sushi and sashimi, and hibachi style dinners. O'sho Japanese Restaurant in Poughkeepsie has a sushi only area and two floors of hibachi tables where guests watch as their food is cooked right in front of them. Hana Sushi in Red Hook is well known for a traditional atmosphere and fresh sushi selections. Other options include Osaka Japanese Restaurant which has two locations. One in Rhinebeck and another in Tivoli. A little further south is the new Neko Sushi, Hibachi and Sake Bar, which also has everything you need for a fabulous Japanese meal.


so do stop off and buy something. You won't be disappointed!
Don't forget to try plenty of local produce. The Dutchess County area has great soil and so everything grows, extra big and extra tasty. The local fruit and vegetables are definitely not to be missed. Try the peaches and apples of the Hudson Valley and you'll be experiencing the tastiest fruit you've ever had. Throughout the countryside you'll find farm shops and pick your own places so you can select some local produce to take home and use in your own home cooking too.
If you're planning a conference or even a wedding, Dutchess County has some spectacular locations and fully equipped facilities to cater to all your needs. Whatever the size of your event, you can be sure Dutchess County will have the right venue for you. You can choose from a whole host of establishments. Here are just a few examples.
