Bellevue (meaning beautiful town in French) is a thriving and expanding city in King County, Washington and currently covers an area of around 33.9 square miles. In 2000 the population was 109,569. The population of Bellevue grows fast and in 2006 was an estimated 118,186. Those living in Bellevue are referred to as Bellevueites. Bellevue is currently the second largest city center in Washington state with over 35,000 employees and 5,000 residents. Bellevue is the 15th wealthiest community in the state of Washington and was recently named the number one places to live and launch a business by CNNMoney. Bellevue is one of the largest cities in the state.It has several sky scraper buildings and a growing business community. Bellevue was rated one of the twenty five safest cities in America based on the per-capita incidence of violent crime.

Bellevue lies between Lake Washington Lake Sammamish . Much of Bellevue is drained by the Kelsey Creek watershed, whose source is in the Larsen and Phantom Lake greenbelt and whose outlet is near where Interstate 90 meets the east shore or Lake Washington. Bellevue is bordered by Kirkland to the north and Redmond in the northeast along the Overlake and Crossroads neighborhoods . Across the East Channel Bridge , I-90 connects Bellevue to Mercer Island to the southwest and Issaquah is to the east. The city is bordered to the west by the suburbs of Medina , Clyde Hill , Hunts Point and Yarrow Point . South of I-90 the Eastgate neighborhood continues up Cougar Mountain . To the west of Cougar Mountain, Bellevue includes Coal Creek and Factoria . The city is bisected by Interstate 405 running north-south, and the southern portion is crossed from west to east by Interstate 90. The State Route 520 freeway roughly delineates the upper reaches of the city. The south end of Bellevue is bordered by the city of Renton, and to the southeast, the city of Newcastle. On a clear day in Bellevue you can see the Olympic Mountains and Cascade Mountains from the hills and some of the skyscraper buildings. The Cascade mountains are less than a one hour drive east on Interstate 90 with easy access to hiking and other outdoor pursuits. Woodinville wine country is just a fifteen minute drive from downtown Bellevue and home to over twenty wineries.

Bellevue is home to the headquarters of many small and large businesses including many technology companies. Bellevue is close to Redmond, home of Microsoft, and with direct highway access to Seattle via Interstate 90 and State Route 520 technological businesses thrive in this area. There are several busy commercial districts, and three major shopping centers. Crossroads Mall, Factoria Mall and the Overlake Shopping District.

William Meydenbauer founded Bellevue in 1869 and it was incorporated officially in 1953. Before the Lake Washington Floating Bridge opened in 1940, Bellevue was a quiet farming area.With the opening of the bridge, access to Seattle was improved and there was an influx of people living in the peace and tranquility of Bellevue and travelling to Seattle to work. In 1963 another bridge was built, the Evergreen Point Floating Bridge and growth continued at a fast rate .

Bellevue Square opened in 1946 and is now one of the largest shopping centers in the area. The square was first expanded in the 1980's and again in more recent years an expansion called "The Lodge" along Bellevue Way and the new One Lincoln Tower were added.

Bellevue has a Council-Manager government with seven electred non-partisan council members who serve four-year terms. The City Council chooses their Mayor from among the members. The mayor serves as council chair but has no veto power. It's mainly a ceremonial role and is a part time position. The main running of city falls to the City Manager who is chosen with more care than the mayor as more work is required of them.

The downtown Bellevue area covers 400 acreswith around 5 million square feet of retail and entertainment space and over 6 million square feet of offices. Over 35,000 people work in downtown Bellevue and nearly 5,000 live there full time. The area is also home to the Bellevue Arts Museum and the Meydenbauer Center, two of the Eastside's most outstanding arts and convention venues. Downtown Bellevue also has the King County Library within it, this library has won awards., You'll also find The Bellevue Collection here, one of the nation's premier retail centers. Bellevue is served by a Burlington Northern branch line railroad known as the Woodinville Subdivision This includes the historic Wilburton Trestle, a local freight line that has been the subject of a controversial plan by King County to remove the rails and replace them with a bicycle trail. As a result of this, a movement has arisen to save the railroad and begin a rail transit service on it as an alternative to the congested I-405 freeway, which runs alongside it.

Bellevue is the main Eastside hub for the King County Metro, the local transit authority and Sound Transit, the regional transit system. The Bellevue Transit Center, serves both the Metro and the Sound buses, and is located in the center of the downtown business district. The Bellevue Transit Center is connected to Interstate 405 by NE 6th St. and a direct-access Texas T HOV ramp. Local buses serve Kirkland, Issaquah, Renton, Redmond and the University District while regional buses can take you to several cities including Bothell, Everett, Seattle, Auburn, Renton, Lynnwood, Kent, Federal Way.

Bellevue has several educational establishments, these include City University and Bellevue Community College (BCC) . Bellevue Community College is the largest Washington and the third largest establishment of higher education in the state. There are four main public high schools in the area. Bellevue High School , Newport High School , Sammamish High School and Interlake High School , and two alternative high schools, Robinswood High School and International School. At elementary level, Bellevue has the only Waldorf Education school in Eastside at Three Cedars School, and there are also several Montessori schools.

The Pacific Northwest Arts and Crafts Association the sponsor of Bellevue Arts Museum was founded in 1947 to promote the artists and craftspeople of the region, and to establish a cultural and educational center for Bellevue and East King County. The first event sponsored by the Pacific Northwest Arts and Crafts Association was an outdoor Art Fair in Bellevue Square in July 1947. The annual Fair has been held in the same location ever since, and today the Bellevue Arts Museum Arts Fair is the largest art event in the Northwest, with over 350,000 visitors every year.

The Bellevue Arts Museum opened in 1975 moving to Bellevue Square in 1983. In 2001 the museum moved into its own building which was designed by Steven Holl . The museum had financial problems and closed down in 2003, but after a lot of fundraising it re-opened in 2005 with an exhibition of teapots. Over the years, the Museum has shown a wide range of exhibitions with a broad regional and national appeal. It has a good reputation as an important showcase for contemporary arts.

In 2004 the Board of Trustees hired Michael Monroe, a national craft and design expert who had previously been the curator and director of the Smithsonian's Renwick Gallery of American Craft and Director of the American Craft Council. Monroe was hired to head the renewed vision of "illuminating and enriching the human spirit through art, craft and design."

The Rosalie Whyel Museum of Doll Art houses one of the world's largest collections of dolls. There are over a thousand dolls on two floors in the Victorian-style building. KidsQuest Childrens Museum opened in 2005 and can be found in Factoria Mall. This 10,000-square-foot museum features play and discovery areas, exhibits, offices, educational activities and classroom spaces.

Bellevue is the site of the annual Bellevue Arts and Crafts Fair which is held every July and has been running since 1947. The biennial Bellevue Sculpture Exhibition brings thousands of visitors to the Downtown Park to see up to 46 sculptures created by artists around the country. Bellevue also holds an annual Strawberry Festival to celebrate its strawberry farming history.

As there are so many businesses in Bellevue it's no surprise that there is a club for entrepreneurs. The Bellevue Entrepreneur Meetup is a great place to meet like minded people, network, share your business plan, or discuss your ideas. The Hilton Bellevue Hotel is just ten minutes from downtown Seattle and 25 minutes from Seattle Tacoma International Airport.The hotel is just just minutes from Microsoft, T-Mobile, Boeing and Captaris making it a perfect base for business travellers.

The hotel has a fitness center that is open round the clock. There is also an outdoor pool with whirlpool spa. The restaurant, Basil's Kitchen, serves breakfast, with an express breakfast buffet. Lunch and dinner feature a full menu of Mediterranean Cuisine. The lobby of the hotel is a great place to relax and enjoy a Tully's Coffee take a visit to Basil's Bar The hotel is within walking distance of old Bellevue which has plenty of shops and art galleries to explore. Bellevue Square Mall is also nearby. The hotel can also host your wedding or event with more than 60,000 square feet of flexible meeting space. Receptions for up to a thousand guests can be accommodated. The Bellevue event planning staff are available to help make your event a big success. Situated just steps from the Meydenbauer Convention Center, the Hilton Bellevue Hotel is conveniently located to meet your all your meeting and conference needs.

TheFairfield Inn By Marriott Bellevue is a great hotel for golfers as the Wayne Public Golf Course is located nearby. The hotel is also near the Cedar River which is great for beginner whitewater paddlers and rafting.

