Summer is typically a time of great family fun and activity. The days are long and warm, the kids are on vacation, and the sun worshipers are out in full force. Its unfortunate that the season also brings with it some very specific hazards - sunburn, heat exhaustion and heat stroke. These hazards are also a threat to your human family, but they can really endanger the lives of your furry family members. As temperatures soar, your dog will need a little attention in order to ensure his safety. If your dogs body temperature gets too high, he could develop heat stroke, or hyperthermia. In addition to a high body temperature (over 105 degrees F), the signs that indicate potential heat stroke are: an inordinate amount of panting, labored breathing, bright red gums or eye membranes, pronounced fatigue, collapse, unconsciousness and seizures. If your dog displays any of these symptoms, get him out of the heat immediately and into the shade. If possible, put your dog in a tub of cool water or bathe him with a series of cool, wet towels. Do not use cold water or ice! Either will cause your dogs blood vessels to constrict and impede the body from being able to release heat. Heat stroke should be treated as an emergency; therefore, as soon as possible, seek a veterinarians care.

Many people dont realize that dogs, just like humans, can be burned by the sun. So what can you do to protect your pooch from those burning rays? Just use the same common sense and know-how that keeps you and your family from burning up in the sun.

First of all, keep your dog in the shade during those times when the suns rays are most intense approximately 10 am to 4 pm. Second, apply a little sun block to your dogs most exposed areas the tip of each ear and the nose. While your dogs lip area is also vulnerable to sunburn, the chance that your dog will ingest any sunscreen applied there is too great. Instead of applying sunscreen to the lip area, just keep a close eye on it and make sure that the area doesn't get too pink. Third, pay special attention to your dog if he has a lighter colored fur. Just like their pale human counterparts, these dogs are more vulnerable to the burning effects of the sun. If, after a day out in the sun, any portion of your dogs skin is reddened or blistered, immediately seek a veterinarians opinion and care. Never leave your dog in the car without the air conditioner running. Even a few minutes in the sun can send the interior temperature of a car (with windows open or closed) soaring to fatal temperatures. If you're doing errands and know that you'll be in and out of the vehicle, your safest option is to simply leave the dog at home. However, if you really must leave your dog in the car for even the shortest period of time, leave the air conditioner on.

Also provide your dog with a shaded, well-ventilated resting area that will remain shaded at all times, regardless of the suns position. You may have to move the dogs shade throughout the day in order to achieve this. Of course, during the most excruciating heat of the day, the ideal place for your dog is an air conditioned structure.

Also ensure make sure that your dog has unhindered access to cool, clean water. Youll want to place the water in a shaded area so that it does not heat up as a result of direct sunlight. Frequently change the water as stagnant water can harbor bacteria and insects that are harmful to a dogs digestive system. When on the move, make sure you're carrying a dish and enough fresh water (prepare for needing a minimum of one gallon per day) on hand at all times. Extra water and blankets are perhaps a good idea as well. Consider what you'll do if the car breaks down, do you have enough water? Can you make shade for your dog? These are all questions you should be asking yourself before you leave. If your dog spends all day outside, provide him with a small, shaded paddling pool filled with water. Your dog can cool himself throughout the day by jumping in and out of it. Make sure, however, that the pool is in the same, consistently shaded area as the drinking water.

Finally avoid any situation that would force your dog to stand on a sun-baked surface for any length of time. Such surfaces include truck beds, sidewalks, streets and beach sand. The heat can not only burn your dogs skin, but can also prevent your dog from efficiently expelling heat from his body. If you must walk your dog in the heat of the day, walk him on a grassy area.


Our pets, just like us are susceptible to the changing temperatures. Extreme hot and cold weather can be just as damaging to a pet as it is a human. Taking a few safety measures can make the summer months enjoyable for both you and your pet. To recap and provide a quick reference list, here are the things to keep in mind during those warmer times of year: One of the most important things you can do for your pet is to always provide a supply of fresh water. Keeping your pet hydrated helps to avoid dehydration and overheating. Avoid exercising your pet during peak temperatures. It's best to exercise early in the morning or later in the evening when the temperature is cooler. If your pet must stay outside, provide a shaded area for him to lay, such as under a tree or a doghouse. Never leave your pet in a vehicle during hot weather. The temperature in the car will always be hotter than the outside temperature. Your pet can quickly become overheated and die. Avoid keeping your dog on the hot concrete or other sun baked surfaces as it can make dogs over heat and can also burn their paw pads. Keep your pet groomed. Pets with thick, dense hair can be shaved to help prevent overheating. Consult your veterinarian or your groomer on how to do so properly but at least make sure there is a complete covering of fur remaining to prevent sun burn Be sure that your pet's vaccinations are up to date before spending a lot of time outdoors as viruses and parasites flourish in the hot weather. On a similar note have your pet tested for heartworms and treat with a preventative, as mosquitoes are more active during the summer months. If you have your windows open, make sure that they have heavy screens and are free of any holes in which your pet could get through

