Middle Ages Alexian Brothers ministry began In the Low Countries and along the Rhine, small groups of men and women banded together to carry on Christ's commands. They would tend the sick, feed the hungry and bury the dead.


1259 first written account, referring to the Beguines and Beghards, of the Brothers The name of these communities evolved from the word "Algignese" which means "heretics." These communes of celibate men and women were looked upon as unorthodox or heretical because of the type of life they lived. Gradually, these communes became more organized.
Mid13th century
Support from the Franciscan order was received.
It was from these-a handful of dedicated laymen along the Rhine - that the Alexian Brothers grew.

1346
Black Death - the Plague
The Brothers stayed, risking their lives, to nurse the victims of the plague, to care for them and bury them when they died.

Fifth century
The men chose St. Alexius, a saint who was devoted to the poor and sick, as the patron of their first chapel. With the passing of time, reference was made to them as "Alexian Brothers" by the people they served.

1472 Pope Sixtus V approved and confirmed the Alexian Brothers as a religious community under the rule of St. Augustine.

1656 One of the first communities of Alexian Brothers was in the historic city of Aachen, Germany. In surrounding villages and towns, smaller, loosely formed communities were established primarily in the Low Countries and the Rhineland. A fire destroyed their house in Aachen in which they rebuilt into one of the first hospitals for the mentally ill.
1797
French Revolution Laws limited the Brothers to twelve men, and their property and administration came under government control.
1812
After the Concordat with Napoleon, only three Brothers were left in the community of Aachen.

1854 Brother Dominic Brock began to rebuild the decimated community just in time to send his men to battlefields and field hospitals in the wars of 1864, 1866, and 1870.

1866
Brother Bonaventure Thelen landed in the United States and established the first Alexian Brothers Hospital for men and boys in a small house on Dearborn Street in Chicago 1869
Immaculate Conception Province was established in Chicago. 1870
Hospitals in St. Louis, Missouri was established 1880
Hospitals in Oshkosh, Wisconsin was established 1892
Hospitals in Elizabeth, New Jersey was established 1871
After a move to larger quarters, the great fire of destroyed everything. Quick to rebuild on the same site, the city plans of a new elevated line forced them to move to yet another location, Belden Avenue. Today, the Alexian Brothers are located in Germany, Belgium, England, Ireland, the Philippines, Hungary, and the United States. The Alexian Brothers story is by no means finished. The Brothers remain committed to the healing ministry and the community, as they did more than seven centuries ago.



The Congregation of Alexian Brothers participates in the healing ministry of Christ within the Catholic Church. Empowered by gospel values, we Alexian Brothers sponsor health related institutions and older adult services dedicated to this healing ministry. With trustees and administrators chosen because they share our commitment toward those most in need, we promise support to those trustees and administrators who participate in our ministry.

Alexian Brothers Medical Center is an acute care hospital and has been providing comprehensive, quality healthcare to residents in Chicago's northwest suburbs for more than 40 years.

Alexian Brothers Corporate Health Services is committed to area businesses and want to help you experience a healthier bottom line. Our goals are to work in partnership with you to keep your employees healthy and safe while helping you control your healthcare dollars. We know that healthy employees have fewer injuries and less health are claims. Our Occupational Health program consists of: Injury care and case management Regulated and non-regulated physicals, drug and alcohol testing, work capacity exams and pre-employment screening. Community and Company Wellness programs Safety/OSHA screening and training

Alexian Brothers Center for Mental Health provides holistic and compassionate community services to those with mental/emotional problems or chronic mental illness in Chicago's northwest suburbs since 1962. 94% of our clients across all programs report high levels of satisfaction with the services they received at our Center.


