The Discovery Channel has stores both online and in the High Street called The Discovery Channel Store, where you can buy products related to the programmes shown on the Discovery Channel itself and also on the other sister channels which include the Science Channel, Discovery Home and Leisure Channel, Discovery Times Channel, Animal Planet, Discovery Kids, Animal Planet and the Travel Channel. The store sells everything from DVDs of the shows through to toys and games, accessories for the home, jewellery and artwork and much more.

DiscoveryStore.com is an integral part of the world-class company renowned for being the number one provider of science related media.



The Discovery Channel Store online has over 2000 products. Simply order online and they will be delivered direct to your home.

The Discovery Channel Store online is one of the best online gift shops for real-world entertainment. It is a top retailer of for a huge range of the latest most innovative products such as books, games, informative DVDs, state-of-the-art tools, modern hi-tech gadgets, inspirational and educational toys, travel accessories and much more.
A visit to the Discovery Channel Store will solve all your gift giving dilemmas. There are so many items that will help children to explore the world and will also stimulate their brain and help them to learn while having fun. There are plenty of award winning DVDs such as the Planet Earth DVD and Book Gift set or the Blue Planet DVD set. There are also plenty of interesting and unusal gifts to choose from. Including the Discovery Wristwatch Walkie-Talkie set, the Discovery ATM Machine, the Discovery Amazing Money Jar Bank, a twin set of Cube World Series, the Discovery Remote Control Roboquad, the Electronic Handheld 20 Questions Game, the Rubik's Revo lution. That's just a few intriguing examples! There is also a wide range of microscopes, radio and remote control toys, telescopes, digital drum pads, cameras, fitness instruments and outdoor items.


There are products for every budget and level too. For example, if you were interesting in purchasing a telescope there are so many choices, you could opt for the Meade® RB-70 Refracting Telescope a top-quality beginner's scope at just $99.00, or you could choose the Discovery Sky & Land Telescope , a 70mm, refracting, short barrel telescope. Designed to be used by both children and adults, it's a great family purchase whether you like stargazing or nature watching at $149.95. Or how about the Meade® ETX-80BB Backpack Observatory Telescope which includes a built-in Barlow lens, field compass and more at $299.00


Shopping is easy and stress free with The Discovery Channel Online Store. Customer Services are always on hand to take your call or you can email them if you prefer . It's a simple process to place your order, there are often special discounts online too. If you don't know what to choose, how about a Discovery Channel Store gift voucher? These can be redeemed online.



The Discovery Store has a team of expert merchandisers who have selected items for each type of gift recipient in their online Gift Finder, simply select the type of person you are shopping for, and you'll be offered up a selection of suitable gifts.

Shopping online with The Discovery Store is safe and secure and that's a guarantee. If any unauthorized charges should be made to your credit card as a result of purchasing from the Discovery Store, you will not have to pay them.

Discovery Store also have a strong confidentiality policy and are committed to safeguarding your personal details and order information. They also never share or sell on any of your details.

There are various shipping methods available, including "Super Saver" which is great if you're cutting costs as it reduces your shipping costs by quite a lot. They will deliver anywhere within the U.S., and also to some countries elsewhere in the world, so check the website to see if they ship to your country. Every item Discovery Store sells is also backed by a 100% unconditional guarantee, so if you are unhappy with your purchase for any reason, you can simply return it for a full refund, no questions asked.

The Discovery Store also provides Buying Guides for some items that can be hard to choose, such as weather stations and telescopes. These will help to inform you about the differences between the products available and so you can make a more educated choice as to which product will best suit your needs.



There is a big Discovery Channel Store in Washington DC. This is no ordinary shop, this is an interactive, educational complex with three stories of exhibits. Where else can you see a cast of the world's largest Tyrannosaurus Rex skeleton that is forty feet high? There are lots of other exhibits to see, from underground on the lowest floor, to outer space on the top floor, and lots in between. There are always demonstrations going on at the Discovery Channel Store that science and technology, travel, exploration.health, history and nature. There's something to interest everyone at The Discovery Channel Store in Washington DC, no matter how old or young you are. The nearest metro station is Gallery Place / Chinatown.



The Discovery Channel store in the Sony Metreon at Mission and Fourth Streets opened in the spring of 1999. The Store encouraged visitors to "Explore Your World," and covered subjects with d isplays and merchandise to cover interests in history, technology and science. Every last detail of the store was designed to move customers through an experience of learning that covered t echnology, science, astronomy, nature, trave and flight. The store was open for just over four years, closing in May 2003.



The Discovery Channel Store has some great products. How about a remote control arthropod? These are exact replicas of insects They have been modelled on real specimens and each insect comes with three exoskeletons so you can easily changethe insect you want to control from Rhinoceros Beetle to Hissing Cockroach to Hercules Beetle. The insects take just two minutes to charge by placing them onto the remote control which is shaped like a branch and has a retractable aerial.



Or perhaps a Space Projection Alarm clock? This futuristic alarm clock projects time and space images on your ceiling or wall. You can choose from images of a full moon, Saturn or a starry sky.The clock has amber LED backlight illumination and dual projecting lenses that superimpose the time over the projected image. The alarm has three sounds to choose from: "Transport," "Ping," and "Analyze". It has manual focusing, memory backup and a 9 minute snooze button.



Or on a similar theme, for those who don't need an alarm clock, how about the Discovery Star Theatre? This magical gadget turns your room into a 360 degree planetarium. You'll see stars and constellations projected onto your walls and ceiling, but this is no random effect, all the heavenly bodies are accurate to season, month, day and hour, it includes a built-in liquid-filled compass & glow light feature and it comes with a DVD and a map of the heavens so you can use it outdoors too.



For younger children, perhaps an Arabian Rocking Horse would be the perfect gift. Built to very high specifications this is timeless gift that will last a long time. It is made from chemical-free and preservative free rubberwood that has stopped producing latex and is Environmental Management ISO 14001and 9001 Certified. The wood is carefully kiln-dried to eliminate pests and bacteria. The rocking horse has long, smooth runners provide an even rocking motion. Rocking is good for developing coordination and motor skills along with helping with balance and strength.
