A CostedExample from a Commercial Presentation
The Product: A 28 WATTSolar Panel Kit - Everything you need except a car battery!
The Hook: Are you fed upwith power blackouts, dips and surges? Perhaps you need an urgentdelivery of a 28 watt solar panel kit to solve your problems. Itcould be with you in twenty-four hours, no problem, and there's noextra charge for shipping either.

The Bait: Our range of solar panels use the latest technology, allowingyou to capture the sun's energy, and to convert this magic solarpower into electrical current to power a range ofappliances.

The Sell: Our panels usecrystalline silicon technology, which is more efficient thanamorphous or thin film solutions, particularly in lower lightconditions found in Northern Europe. All our solar panels areaccredited with the internationally recognised IEC 61215certification. Our solar panels extend from 5 watts through to 150watts in power. Choosing the correct size of panel will depend onvariables such as the power drawn by your appliances, daily lengthof use and hourly sunshine rates. All panels over 28 WATTs requirea voltage regulator. Please refer to our accessory table to ensureyou have the correct equipment to operate your chosen solarpanel.

The Bribe: Are you struggling withtechnology you don't quite understand yet? Talk to us first, ourtechnologists are waiting for your call

The Deal: Our price an amazing $220for 28 WATT Solar Panel. Convertthis bargain intoelec tric current and power an amazingrange of your own appliances for just a few $$$ more, Youget
Voltage regulato for just $29.95 150 Watt inverter on stand for only$55 Panel stand for an unbelievable $9.50more

Could you believe this? Ourcompetition certainly can't believe we're giving away crystalline silicon technology - which is moreefficient than amorphous or thin film- for these crazy prices. Infact, even our supplier's are a little annoyed. Our exclusive 28 watt panel provides a continuoustrickle feed, maintaining and extending the life of any 12V batteryyou choose to fit. What's more, it's supplied with a 4 Amp chargecontroller, all the necessary cable (five meters), connectors anddetailed installation instructions too.
A solar panel carry bag is available as an optionto protect your precious kit. This is a great addition where yourpanel will be used in temporary locations - e.g. where used with atouring caravan. What's even more amazing, our carry bag is madefrom hard wearing shower resistant cordura ,AND offers tough custom built protection for your solar panel too.Why not take on board our handy universal stand as well? It quicklyfits to the panels, enabling them to be used in free standing mode,perfectly angled to suit the sun any time of day or year. In summary, for our low, low price you get
High efficiency crystalline cell for "allweather" charging Perfect for powering lap top computers* anduse in larger caravans over a period of an entire week Water resistant, robust construction foroutdoor use Built-in diode protects against batterydischarge 20 year cell warranty and 10 year modulewarranty Practical carry bag and cable kitincluded Technical Specifications Power: 28 watts
Peak Output: 1.70A @ 17.6V
Approximate watt-hours per day*: 196
Approximate amp-hours per day*: 11.9
Dimensions: 559 x 407 x 25mm
Weight: 2.8kg * Based on 7 hours of average daily peak sunlighthours

That's perfect for caravan 12Vbattery operation For a one-week trip, or even laptop computeroperation Module Profile:
Our module is designed in accordance withIEC61215:1993 standards, manufactured with proven materials, andtested to ensure electrical performance and service life. SiN filmdeposited on the front surface by PECVD acts as anti reflectioncoating and gives a uniform dark blue appearance. Cells are laminated between high transmission low-iron 3mm tempered glass, a sheet of TPT material AND two sheets ofEVA to prevent moisture penetrating into the module.Heavy dutyanodized aluminium frame provides high wind resistance andconvenient mounting access.

A multi-contact waterproofversatile junction box and terminals allow for quick and simpleconnection.The cable supplied - designed for photo voltaic use - guarantees thateach module has excellent power transmission throughout theyear.
Review

In our experience, solar energy is a proven power source that isused around the world for a variety of industrial, domestic,commercial, and government applications. ISolar is already poweringwater pumps in African villages, weather stations in the antarctic,and satellites in deep space! It works by transforming energy fromthe sun into a renewable form of electricity, a process known asPhotovoltaic conversion (or PV for short).


Every Solar panel you buy acts as a collecting tray, helping youto catch the sun rays. The larger the panel, the more energy youcan accumulate. The energy collected is stored for future use inbatteries. Sometimes you could collect even more energy than youactually need, in which case you may need a voltage regulator tocontrol energy flow, and to prevent battery damage.


It would indeed be difficult to find a more environmentallyfriendly power supply. Clean and green, solar power is a renewable,sustainable and non-polluting source of energy. It is easy tounderstand the appeal of solar power for domestic use. Lowmaintenance and long lasting, solar energy is a highlycost-effective and reliable energy supply. All Solar panels evennormally come with a 10 year guarantee.
Just Imagine These ExtraBenefits!
Let's start with receiving anelectricity bill costing you practically nothing. And that would befor as far into the future as you can, well, see! In fact, there'ssuch an abundance coming your way soon that you could sell on yoursurplus too - that's if your neighbor or your service provider isin a buying mood.
Now, try to think of a time in the future whennearly every household, apartment complex, condo and town would befestooned with photovoltaic cells. This is not too far into thefuture - for there has been a phenomenal growth in interest insolar energy in recent decades.

The solar industry received a fresh lease of life with theresurgence of new-found enthusiasms in solar energy arising fromprojects like San Francisco's huge new grant for a 280 megawattplant in the Arizona desert. To get solar power moving in a bigway, companies like Intel are building solar start-up units toattract investments. These firms see themselves as forerunners inthis field. Intel's global investment program began with an initialmodest investment of $50 million. Joining Intel is a powerfulcoalition of power corporations and interests, including big nameslike Cogentrix Energy, Solon AG, LLC (a subsidiary of GoldmanSachs) and PCG Clean Energy and Technology Fund.

The latest photovoltaic cells are the"circuit" part of solar panels, which convert sunlight to energyvia photoelectric effects. The primary business of companies is themanufacture of the photovoltaic solar cells themselves, leavingothers to exploit them. This is expected to spin off into massivepower generation projects over time, as fossil becomes scarcer andmore expensive,

These pioneering companies intend mass-producing solar cells to besold to panel makers. Since manufacturing photovoltaic is similar -on the most basic manufacturing level - to making computer chips,these initiatives are a logical progression. The primary focus ofthese operations is to bring down the cost of the cells byimproving the manufacturing process. The companies also aime toadvance solar technology in general, to improve efficiencies, andto ramp up the value of cells sold.

By way of an example, a new venture envisaging a manufacturing andtechnology center in Oregon plans to commence construction shortly.The President of Intel Capital and Intel Executi ve Vice President Arvind Sodhani is of the opinion that "thisnew solar company is a fine example of Inte'ls leading influence.SpectraWatt is a great example of technology resulting fromentrepreneurial efforts inside ourl organisation. This is animportant investment opportunity for Intel Capital in the growingclean-tech sector, and we look forward to working with the companyto support its expansion",

There is a tremendous growth potentia out therel for companies likethis according to Photon Consulting (which tracks growth in themarket). When one considers that solarpower costs twice the price of traditional fossil fuel , this growth is quite amazing, even with capitalexpenses factored in.

These developmental expenses are expected to drop impressivelywithin the next few years thanks to economies of scale, thussustaining a projected yearly growth of 30% to 40%. Ventures likeIntel's are just another step in the campaign for the whole worldto go green, and promote environmental responsibility.

Out of interest, Intel leads the Environmental Protection Agency'sGreen Power list as the largest purchaser of green energy credits.Andrew B Wilson, SpectraWatt Chief executive officer and formergeneral manager in the Intel New Business Initiatives Group,recently praised Intel's work by saying that "the formation ofSpectraWatt is an important step forward in the renewable energymarket. We are pleased to work with these companies in the sharedgoal of moving towards long-term national energy independence."

We wonder whether the petrochemical moguls would agree with thisvision!
The evidence is there for all tosee - solar panels are the way forward for sustainable andrenewable power. While perfect technology may still be lagging, itis rapidly catching up, especially with the arrival of some of thereally big names in the microchip field - Intel for example.

One wonders if the major oil companies are fronting throughanonymous third-parties just to get in on the action. They too haveto think about the future, and the exhaustibility of the fossilfuels they are busy exploiting on every continent, including theAntartic. Not wanting to be left behind, you can be sure thatcompanies like Shell, BP, Mobil and so on will want to keep theirhands firmly on the tiller too. No problem there, just so long asthey don't continue the ruination of Planet Earth!

Epilogue

Fast forward. We are in the year 2272. Earth ran out of options,when power stations burning the dregs of coal obscured the sun.Solar panels spluttered to a stop, as people desperately lit firesto ward off the growing chill. It was not long before stocks ofdwindling wood had become the new currency of power.

The next great ice age returned. Crops failed and livestock died.Snow fell heavily, collapsing roofs and suffocating familiesinstantly. Thus time there lifted. A few remaining light bulbsflickered on as solar panels thawed.

Don't kid yourself that this is not possible. Take solar powerseriously while yet you have a chance. If not for you, then atleast for the generations that follow. For they will thank you forthis if you do, and this could be your memorial.

END
