Tornadoes
Tornadoes. There is nothing quite like a spinning funnel of wind casting cattle and cars thousands of meters before dropping them unharmed and undamaged to the ground to capture our imagination. But what do we really know about tornadoes? What are they, and how are they formed? Can we predict them? And can they really throw object across the town without damaging them?
We do not know the answers to most of these questions yet--not entirely, and not for want of trying--but advances are being made every year, and every study of every tornado brings us that little bit nearer to finding the facts. So what do we know?
What are tornadoes? According to the Glossary of Meteorology, a tornado descends from a cumuliform cloud or underneath a cumuliform cloud, and is often visible as a funnel cloud. In order for a vortex to be classified as a tornado, it must be in contact with the ground and the cloud base. Weather scientists haven't found it so simple in practice, however, to classify and define tornadoes. For example, the difference is unclear between an strong mesocyclone (parent thunderstorm circulation) on the ground, and a large, weak tornado.
There is also disagreement as to whether separate touchdowns of the same funnel constitute separate tornadoes. Also, it is well-known that a tornado may not have a visible funnel. There are also many unanswered questions. At what wind speed of the cloud-to-ground vortex does a tornado begin? How close must two or more different tornadic circulations become to qualify as a one multiple-vortex tornado, instead of separate tornadoes? There are no firm answers.
We do know that a tornado begins as a rotating, funnel-shaped cloud extending from a thunderstorm cloud base. A funnel cloud is made visible by cloud droplets, though in some cases, lack of moisture can cause it to appear to be invisible. When the funnel cloud is half-way between the cloud base and the ground, it is called a tornado. The tornado's high-speed winds rotate about a small, relatively calm center, and suck up dust and debris, making the tornado darker and more easily seen.
There are two types of tornadoes: those that come from a supercell thunderstorm, and those that do not.
Tornadoes that form from a supercell thunderstorm are the most common, and often the most dangerous. A supercell is a long-lived (greater than 1 hour) and highly organized storm feeding off an updraft (a rising current of air) that is tilted and rotating. This rotating updraft - as large as 10 miles in diameter and up to 50,000 feet tall - can be present as much as 20 to 60 minutes before a tornado forms. Scientists call this rotation a mesocyclone when it is detected by Doppler radar. The tornado is a very small extension of this larger rotation. Most large and violent tornadoes come from supercells.
Non-supercell tornadoes are circulations that form without a rotating updraft. One non-supercell tornado is the gustnado, a whirl of dust or debris at or near the ground with no condensation funnel, which forms along the gust front of a storm. Another non-supercell tornado is a landspout. A landspout is a tornado with a narrow, rope-like condensation funnel that forms when the thunderstorm cloud is still growing and there is no rotating updraft - the spinning motion originates near the ground. Waterspouts are similar to landspouts, except they occur over water. Damage from these types of tornadoes tends to be F2 or less.
Scientists have learned a lot about tornadogenesis from theoretical studies, field projects and physical models - but tornadogenesis - the way tornadoes form - has vexed researchers for decades.
The classic answer -- "warm moist Gulf air meets cold Canadian air and dry air from the Rockies" -- is a gross oversimplification. Many thunderstorms form under the same conditions (near warm fronts, cold fronts and drylines respectively), without ever coming close to producing tornadoes.
Even when the large-scale environment is extremely favorable for tornadic thunderstorms, as in an SPC "High Risk" outlook: not every thunderstorm spawns a tornado. The truth is that we don't fully understand how and why tornadoes form.
The most destructive and deadly tornadoes occur from supercells; rotating thunderstorms with a well-defined radar circulation called a mesocyclone. These supercells can also produce damaging hail, severe non-tornadic winds, frequent lightning, and flash floods. Tornado formation is believed to be dictated mainly by things which happen in and around the mesocyclone.
Recent theories and results from the VORTEX program suggest that once a mesocyclone is underway, tornado development is related to the temperature differences across the edge of downdraft air wrapping around the mesocyclone. However, mathematical model studies of tornado formation also indicate that it can happen without such temperature patterns.
Tornadoes do form under weather conditions in which three very different types of air come together in a certain way. Near the ground lies a layer of warm and humid air, along with strong south winds. Colder air and strong west or southwest winds lie in the upper atmosphere. Temperature and moisture differences between the surface and the upper levels create instability--a necessary ingredient for tornado formation. The change in wind speed and direction with height is known as wind shear. This wind shear is linked to the eventual development of rotation from which a tornado may form.
An example of wind shear that can eventually create a tornado is when winds at ground level, often slowed down by friction with the earth's surface, come from the southwest at 5mph. But higher up, at 5000 feet above the same location, the winds are blowing from the southeast at 25mph! An invisible "tube" of air begins to rotate horizontally. Rising air within the thunderstorm tilts the rotating air from horizontal to vertical - now the area of rotation extends through much of the storm.
A third layer of hot dry air becomes established between the warm moist air at low levels and the cool dry air aloft. This hot layer acts as a cap and allows the warm air underneath to warm further--making the air even more unstable. Things start to happen when a storm system aloft moves east and begins to lift the various layers. Through this lifting process the cap is removed, thereby setting the stage for explosive thunderstorm development as strong updrafts develop. Complex interactions between the updraft and the surrounding winds may cause the updraft to begin rotating--and a tornado is born.
And, since not all tornadoes come from supercells, what about tornadogenesis in non-supercell thunderstorms?
NON-SUPERCELL TORNADOGENESIS A non-supercell tornado does not form from organized storm-scale rotation. These tornadoes form from a vertically spinning parcel of air already occurring near the ground, about 1-10 km in diameter, These are often caused by wind shear from a warm, cold, or sea breeze front, or a dryline. When an updraft moves over the spinning air, and stretches it, a tornado can form. Eastern Colorado experiences non-supercell tornadoes when cool air rushes down off the Rocky Mountains and collides with the hot dry air of the plains. Since these types of tornadoes happen mostly over scarcely populated land, scientists are not sure how strong they are, but they tend to be small. Waterspouts and gustnadoes are formed in this way too.
Because a tornado is part of a severe convective storm, and these storms occur all over the Earth, tornadoes are not limited to any specific geographic location. Tornadoes have been documented on every continent, with the exception of Antarctica (and even there, a tornado occurrence is not impossible). In fact, wherever the atmospheric conditions are exactly right, the occurrence of a tornadic storm is possible
However, some parts of the world are much more prone to tornadoes than others. Globally, the middle latitudes, between about 30° and 50° North or South, provide the most favorable environment for tornadogenesis. This is the region where cold, polar air meets warmer, subtropical air, often generating convective precipitation along the collision boundaries. In addition, air in the mid-lattitudes often flows at different speeds and directions at different levels of the troposphere, facilitating the development of rotation within a storm cell. Interestingly, the places that receive the most frequent tornadoes are also considered the most fertile agricultural zones of the world. This is due in part to the high number of convective storms delivering needed rainfall to these areas. Simply, as a result of the large number of storms and the favorable environment, the odds are increased that some of these storms will produce tornadoes.
In terms of absolute tornado counts, the United States leads the list, with an average of over 1,000 tornadoes recorded each year. A distant second is Canada, with around 100 per year. Other locations that experience frequent tornado occurrences include northern Europe, western Asia, Bangladesh, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, China, South Africa and Argentina. In fact, the United Kingdom has more tornadoes, relative to its land area, than any other country. Fortunately, most UK tornadoes are relatively weak.
In the United States, there are two regions with a disproportionately high frequency of tornadoes. The first is Florida, simply because has a high frequency of almost daily thunderstorms. In addition, tropical storms or hurricanes often impact the Florida peninsula every year. When these tropical systems move ashore, the embedded convective storms in the rain bands often produce tornadoes. However, despite the violent nature of a tropical storm or hurricane, the tornadoes they spawn (some as water spouts) tend to be weaker than those produced by non-tropical thunderstorms.
The other tornado-prone region in the United States is "Tornado Alley" in the south-central U.S.
The Great Plains of the Central United States are uniquely suited to bring all of the necessary ingredients together. The main factors are the Rocky Mountains to the west, the Gulf of Mexico to the south, and a terrain that slopes downward from west to east.
During the spring and summer months, southerly winds prevail across the plains. At the origin of those south winds lie the warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico, which provide plenty of warm, humid air needed to fuel severe thunderstorm development. Hot dry air forms over the higher elevations to the west, and becomes the cap as it spreads eastward over the moist Gulf air. Where the dry air and the Gulf air meet near the ground, a boundary known as a dry line forms to the west of Oklahoma. A storm system moving out of the southern Rockies may push the dryline eastward, with severe thunderstorms and tornadoes forming along the dryline or in the moist air just ahead of it.
Tornado Alley consistently experiences a large number of tornadoes each year. Tornadoes in this region typically occur in late Spring and occasionally the early fall. The Gulf Coast area has a separate tornado maximum nicknamed "Dixie Alley" with a relatively high frequency of tornadoes occurring in the late fall (October through December).
Strong to violent tornadoes are relatively rare, and do not typically occur outside the United States. Although the boundaries of Tornado Alley are debatable, the region from central Texas, northward to northern Iowa, and from central Kansas and Nebraska east to western Ohio is often collectively known as Tornado Alley. Meteorologically, the region known as Tornado Alley is ideally situated for the formation of supercell thunderstorms, which are among the most common producers of violent tornadoes.
Around 77% of all tornadoes in the U.S. are considered weak and about 95% of all U.S. tornadoes are below EF3 intensity. The remaining 5% of tornadoes are categorized as violent. Only 0.1% of all tornadoes achieve estimated winds over 200mph and nearly complete destruction. However, given that on average over 1,000 tornadoes hit the U.S. each year, that means that 20 can be expected to be violent and possibly one might be incredible.
The strength of tornadoes is measured on what is known as the Fujita Tornado Damage Scale.
Dr. T. Theodore Fujita, a pioneer in the study of tornadoes and severe thunderstorm phenomena, developed the Fujita Tornado Damage Scale (F-Scale) to provide estimates of tornado strength based on damage surveys. Since it is extremely difficult to make direct measurements of tornado winds, an estimate of the winds based on damage is the best way to classify them. The new Enhanced Fujita Scale (EF-Scale) addresses some of the limitations identified by meteorologists and engineers since the introduction of the Fujita Scale in 1971.
Variability in the quality of construction and different local building codes made classifying tornadoes in a uniform manner difficult. In many cases, these inconsistencies led to overestimates in the strength of tornadoes. The new scale identifies 28 different free standing structures most affected by tornadoes, taking into account construction quality and maintenance. The range of tornado intensities remains as before, zero to five, with 'EF0' being the weakest, associated with very little damage and 'EF5' representing complete destruction, which was the case in Greensburg, Kansas on May 4th, 2007, the first tornado classified as 'EF5'. The EF scale was adopted on February 1, 2007.
New EF Scale: Old F-Scale: Typical Damage: EF0 (65-85 mph) F0 (65-73 mph) Light damage. Peels surface off some roofs; some damage to gutters or siding; branches broken off trees; shallow-rooted trees pushed over. EF1 (86-110 mph) F1 (73-112 mph) Moderate damage. Roofs severely stripped; mobile homes overturned or badly damaged; loss of exterior doors; windows and other glass broken. EF2(111-135 mph) F2 (113-157 mph) Considerable damage. Roofs torn off well-constructed houses; foundations of frame homes shifted; mobile homes completely destroyed; large trees snapped or uprooted; light-object missiles generated; cars lifted off ground. EF3 (136-165 mph) F3 (158-206 mph) Severe damage. Entire stories of well- constructed houses destroyed; severe damage to large buildings such as shopping malls; trains overturned; trees debarked; heavy cars lifted off the ground and thrown; structures with weak foundations blown away some distance. EF4 (166-200 mph) F4 (207-260 mph) Devastating damage. Whole frame houses Well-constructed houses and whole frame houses completely leveled; cars thrown and small missiles generated. EF5 (>200 mph) F5 (261-318 mph) Incredible damage. Strong frame houses leveled off foundations and swept away; automobile-sized missiles fly through the air in excess of 100 m (109 yd); high-rise buildings have significant structural deformation; incredible phenomena will occur. EF No rating F6-F12 (319 mph Inconceivable damage. Should a to speed of sound) tornado with the maximum wind speed in excess of F5 occur, the extent and types of damage may not be conceived. A number of missiles such as iceboxes, water heaters, storage tanks, automoblies, etc.will create serious secondary damage on structures.
Most tornadoes do not cause deaths, and most of those that do, claim only a few lives. It is in part a result of improved forecasting and early warning systems that the death toll from tornadoes has dropped significantly over the years, despite increasing populations in tornado-prone areas. Unfortunately, super-violent tornadoes are still documented, some with exceptional death tolls. Interestingly, a number of these devastating tornadoes have occurred outside of Tornado Alley, and at times of day or year not normally associated with violent tornadoes. Although all of the most deadly tornadoes occurred prior to the invention of the Fujita Scale, historical records of their damage have led them to be classified as either F4 or F5.
Continued vigilance and quick response to tornado watches and warnings are critical, since tornadoes can strike virtually anywhere at any time. Most tornadoes are abrupt at onset, short-lived and often obscured by rain or darkness. The best way to deal with them is to be prepared. Every individual and business should have a tornado emergency plan for their homes and places of work, and should learn how to protect themselves in cars, open country, and other situations that may arise.

Remember if a tornado warning is issued for your area, a tornado is imminent. Know what to do--have an emergency plan to protect yourself and those for whom you are responsible. Quick response when a tornado approaches can save many lives. There may be only seconds in which to take action.

There are 5 Basic Steps in the National Weather Service warning system. Every part of the system has to work for the greatest number of people to get the warning in time. The Tornado Watch

Meteorologists using the latest in computers, radar and satellite data are always monitoring the weather elements. When a high probability of severe weather exists, a tornado or severe thunderstorm watch is issued. Watches may be issued hours before any severe storm hits the area. The forecasters at the National Severe Storms Forecast Center in Kansas City, Missouri use every tool available including satellite pictures, radar reports, and numerous weather charts to predict the areas where severe thunderstorms and tornadoes are likely to occur. Spotters

Severe weather spotters are constantly being trained under the Skywarn training program. Spotting severe weather is serious business and requires specific training. However, once an observer is trained in severe weather spotting procedures, they are one of the most reliable tools of the National Weather Service meteorologist. Spotters serve as the National Weather Service's eyes in the field. Civil Defense and the State Police

Any information that the National Weather Service issues is relayed to individual cities and towns through state and local civil defense, and the State Police. The Media

The vast majority of people are reached through the cooperation of the media. A direct line between the National Weather Service and local media offices insures that severe weather information is relayed quickly and broadcast within the shortest time possible. The Users

Users include everyone within the severe thunderstorm or tornado warning area. Warnings must reach the greatest number of people possible and provide a concise, yet persuasive message of necessary action. Even if every other step in the warning system works, it does little good unless the users know what to do, and act. There is little that can be done to prevent a tornado from occurring, but by knowing the safety rules the number of deaths and injuries can be minimized.
A tornado watch means that tornado development is possible. Keep a watchful eye on the sky for threatening weather and stay tuned to radio and television and listen for weather bulletins.
A tornado warning means that a tornado has been sighted or indicated by radar. Persons in the path of the storm should seek shelter immediately--preferably in a storm cellar, underground excavation, or in a steel-framed or concrete reinforced building.
A severe thunderstorm warning means that either spotters or radar have indicated that severe weather is occuring, and is expected to be heading towards you soon. This warning is issued by the National Weather Service local office, and usually covers a few counties, lasting about an hour or so. A thunderstorm is classified as severe when it can contain hail three-quarter inches or larger, and/or wind gusts of 58 mph or higher, and/or a tornado. When a warning is issued, persons should remain indoors until the storm has passed.
In homes, the basement offers the greatest safety. Seek shelter under sturdy furniture if possible. In homes without basements, take cover in the center part of the house, on the lowest floor, in a small room such as a closet or bathroom, or under sturdy furniture. Stay away from windows!
In schools, hospitals, and shopping centers, move to pre-designated shelter areas. Interior hallways on lowest floors are best. If the building is not of reinforced construction, go to a nearby one that is, or take cover outside on low, protected ground. Stay out of auditoriums, gymnasiums, and other structures with wide free-span roofs.
In open country, move away from the tornado's path at right angles. If there is no time to escape, lie flat in the nearest ditch or ravine.
In your car, do not try to outrun a tornado. If available take shelter in a sturdy structure. Otherwise, get in the nearest ditch or depression until the tornado passes.
Mobile homes are particularly vulnerable to overturning during strong winds and should be evacuated when strong winds or tornadoes are forecast. Damage can be minimized by securing trailers with cables anchored in concrete footing. Trailer parks should have some community storm shelters. If there is no shelter nearby, leave the trailer park and take cover on low-protected ground.
The longest tornado path w as reported to have traveled from Missouri to Indiana in 1917. It was on the ground for 7 hours and 20 minutes. Because there was no damage report filed, its difficult to know if this tornado actually stayed on the ground for the entire time, or if it was the result of several tornadoes.
The shortest reported tornado was 7 feet long
The strongest winds in a tornado were reported by Mobile Doppler radar on May 3, 1999, where one twister was recorded as having winds as fast as 318 mph. The winds swirling around a tornado vortex have been reported to be on the range of 280-300 mph. Scientists have found that the strongest winds occur about 300 feet above the ground. Most tornadoes, however, fail to have wind speeds in excess of 113 mph.
Tornadoes have picked people and items up, carried them some distance and then set them down without injury or damage. People and animals have been transported up to a quarter mile or more without serious injury. Fragile items, such as sets of fine china, or glass-ware have been blown from houses and recovered, miles away, without any damage. However, given the quantity of airborne debris, these occurrences are the exception, rather than the norm.
A tornado can drive a straw through a telephone pole. The forces inside a tornado are incredible, and still poorly understood. But they are certainly strong enough to turn otherwise harmless items into deadly missiles. Anything can become a deadly projectile.
Tornadoes skip across the ground MYTH: Not in a literal sense, despite what you may have read in many older references, news stories, or even damage survey reports. By definition, a tornado must be in contact with the ground. There is disagreement in meteorology over whether or not multiple touchdowns of the same vortex or funnel cloud mean different tornadoes. In either event, stories of skipping tornadoes usually mean one of three things: There was continuous contact between vortex and ground in the path, but it was too weak to do damage. Multiple tornadoes happened; but there was no survey done to precisely separate their paths (very common before the 1970s). There were multiple tornadoes with only short separation, but the survey erroneously classified them as one tornado. When confronted by a tornado warning, you should open all the windows in your house to equalize the pressure. MYTH: This just wastes valuable time. Don't worry about equalizing the pressure, the roof ripping off and the pickup truck smashing through the front wall will equalize the pressure for you.
I live in a big city, a tornado wouldn't hit a big city. MYTH: Tornadoes have hit several large cities, including Dallas, Oklahoma City, Wichita Falls, St. Louis, Miami, and Salt Lake City. In fact, an urban tornado will have a lot more debris to toss around than a rural twister.
Tornadoes don't happen in the mountains. MYTH: Tornadoes do occur in the mountains. Damage from an F3 tornado was documented above 10,000 feet, and a hiker in the mountains of Utah photographed a weak tornado in the mountains.
My city doesn't get tornadoes because it is protected by a river. MYTH: Many tornadoes have crossed rivers and even gone on to cause widespread damage to riverside cities. For example, the Nachez, Mississippi tornado of 1840 tracked directly down the Mississippi River, killing hundreds, mostly on the water. Others have crossed large rivers without losing speed (they momentarily became water spouts) and devastated cities that folklore had thought immune to tornadoes. An example was the Waco, TX tornado of 1953 that crossed the Brazos River, or the Great St. Louis Cyclone of 1896 that jumped the Mississippi River.
Hiding under a freeway overpass will protect me from a tornado. MYTH: While the concrete and re-bar in the bridge may offer some protection against flying debris, the overpass also acts as a wind tunnel and may actually serve to collect debris. When you abandon your vehicle at the overpass and climb up the sides, you are doing two things that are hazardous. First, you are blocking the roadway with your vehicle. When the tornado turns all the parked vehicles into a mangled, twisted ball and wedges them under the overpass, how will emergency vehicles get through?
Second, the winds in a tornado tend to be faster with height. By climbing up off the ground, you place yourself in even greater danger from the tornado and flying debris. When coupled with the accelerated winds due to the wind tunnel (Venturi Effect), these winds can easily exceed 300 mph.
Unfortunately, at least three people hiding under underpasses during tornadoes have already been killed, and dozens have been injured by flying debris. If you realize you won't be able to outrun an approaching tornado, you are much safer to abandon your vehicle, and take shelter in a road-side ditch or other low spot. If a highway overpass is your only shelter option, only consider it if the overpass has sturdy roadway supports, next to which (at ground level) you can take shelter. Avoid the smooth concrete, support-less spans at all costs.
I can outrun a tornado, especially in a vehicle. MYTH: Tornadoes can move at up to 70 mph or more and shift directions erratically and without warning. It is unwise to try to outrace a tornado. It is better to abandon your vehicle and seek shelter immediately.
Tornadoes are more likely to hit a mobile home park. MYTH: Not so. It just seems that way for two reasons. First, mobile home parks are a ubiquitous part of our landscape. There are tens of thousands of mobile homes in tornado alley, so there is a pretty good likelihood that some of them will be in the path of a tornado. Unfortunately, the second factor is that mobile homes offer little to no protection against even the weakest tornadoes, so when a tornado does strike a mobile home park, the damage is more likely to be significant. Winds that would only lift some shingles on a frame house can easily flip a mobile home.
Strong, sturdy brick or stone buildings will protect me from a tornado. MYTH: While such buildings will provide more protection in a tornado than a mobile home or timber frame structure, the winds of a tornado can easily launch a 2x4 through a brick wall, and can cause even the sturdiest of buildings to experience roof or wall failure.
To keep from being sucked into the tornado, can tie myself to a well pipe, just like they did in the movie "Twister". MYTH: While it is unlikely that a tornado will dislodge a deeply buried pipe, the rope you tie around yourself is more likely to act as a combination tetherball and cheese slicer. Lighter winds will likely cause you to be whipped around at the end of the rope, banging against anything within the radius of the rope. Stronger winds inside the tornado are just as likely to pull your body from the rope (and possibly not in one piece).
A tornado is not coming directly at me, I am safe. MYTH: Tornados have been known to act erratically, often changing directions quickly. Sturdy shelter is the only safe place to be during a tornado. Although it may be tempting to follow a tornado to get a cool photo, please leave the tornado chasing to trained meteorologists.
Tornadoes don't strike the same place twice MYTH: Since tornadoes are relatively rare, at least in these regions that you might have to wait centuries for one to strike any given point, you would figure that once you have been hit by a tornado, it would be clear sailing from then on out, right? Sure, but there are always exceptions. Statistics alone can not protect you.
When Your Number Is Up Department: on 2 December 1982 a Missouri man was injured when his home was flattened by a tornado. He moved into a trailer home for temporary shelter - and three weeks later was killed when a second tornado came through town.
Right Place at the Wrong Time Department: a house in Collinsville, IL was destroyed by a tornado on 18 May 1883. The rebuilt structure was hit again on 30 March 1938.
The possibility of a building being struck by a tornado is rare, typically less than once per thousand years. But one church in Guy, Arkansas has been damaged by twisters three times during the last century.
Statistically, you will have to wait hundreds of years to be struck by a tornado standing at any one spot in "tornado alley". But on 16 Match 1942, Baldwin, MI was lashed by a tornado, and only 25 minutes later, before the clean up could even begin, another twister trotted through town .
War is hell but nothing like Nebraska ... a sentiment that must have been expressed by the Spanish American War veteran who returned home to Nebraska in 1899, only to have his house destroyed in a twister. He moved to Omaha, only to have his house destroyed again in 1913.
The deadliest tornado outbreak in U.S. history occured on March 18, 1925. 747 people were killed and 2,027 were injured in Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana when several twisters touched down on this day. The largest of these tornadoes, named the "Tri-State", took 695 lives and was classified as an F5. It moved over 215 miles of land at 60-73 mph.
The most impressive and devastating tornado outbreak in the 20th century was the Super Outbreak of April 3-4, 1974. The outbreak lasted 16 hours and produced a total of 148 tornadoes across 13 states from Illinois, Indiana and Michigan southward through the Ohio and Tennessee Valleys into Mississippi, Alabama and Georgia. This outbreak produced more long-track tornadoes than any other, killing 315 people and injuring more than 5,000. The most notable individual tornado was the one that moved into Xenia, Ohio, just before 4:30 p.m. It destroyed much of the town, including the town square and high school, killing 35 people.
The most expensive single tornado occured on June 8, 1966, when a tornado brought massive damage to Topeka, Kansas, causing $100 million in damage.
Other significant tornado outbreaks of the 20th Century include: The outbreak of April 24-26, 1908 , included violent tornadoes that moved through parts of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama, killing 324 people and injuring 1,652 others. The worst damage took place in Amite, La., where 29 people died.
A long-track tornado on May 26, 1917 , trav eled across Illinois and Indiana for 293 miles, lasting seven hours and 20 minutes. The tornado killed 101 people and injured 638 others. Another tornado moved through the town of Matoon, Ill., destroying everything in a two and a half block-wide path for 2.5 miles.
On March 21-22, 1932 , a total of 330 people died as a result of tornadoes that touched down across northern Alabama. One tornado hit the northeast part of the state, killing 38 and injuring 500.
The Tupelo/Gainesville outbreak on April 5-6, 1936 , when 17 tornadoes were scattered across parts of northern Mississippi and northern Georgia. A massive pair of tornadoes hit Gainesville, Ga., in the morning, killing 203 people and causing 1,600 injuries.
On March 16, 1942 , an outbreak left 152 dead and 1,284 injured from tornadoes that raked across parts of Illinois, Mississippi, Tennessee and Kentucky. As many as 63 people perished in a tornado northwest of Greenwood, Miss., that hit as buses carried school children home. Five hundred people were injured.
On June 23, 1944, a total of 154 people died and nearly 1,000 were injured as tornadoes struck parts of Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland and Delaware. The worst areas affected were parts of northeast West Virginia and western Maryland, where a tornado family killed 30 and injured 300.
On April 9, 1947 , a tornado outbreak that included eight tornadoes raked across parts of Texas, Oklahoma and Kansas. One tornado killed 107 people in Woodward, Okla. Devastation covered 100 city blocks and 1,000 homes were damaged or destroyed. Cost of the damage at that time was estimated at $6 million. Clean-up afterward was hampered by cold and snow.
On May 11, 1953 , a violent tornado hit downtown Waco, Texas, killing 114 people and destroying about 200 business buildings. Heaps of bricks up to five feet high filled the streets. Survivors were buried for up to 14 hours.
In early June 1953 , a tornado outbreak produced two major tornadoes. On June 8, a tornado hit in Flint, Mich., leaving 116 people dead. The next day, June 9, a tornado described as "a huge cone of black smoke" carrying debris eastward over the Boston area and out over the Atlantic Ocean caused 94 deaths and nearly 1,300 injuries in Worcester, Mass. In the United States, the death toll was 116 from tornadoes in Michigan, Ohio, Massachusetts and New Hampshire. Other tornadoes occurred in Canada.
On May 25, 1955 , a tornado outbreak hit Oklahoma and Kansas. The hardest-hit area was Udall, Kansas. Eighty people were known dead and 270 were injured--more than half of the people in Udall--and the town was destroyed. For the entire outbreak, tornadoes killed 102 people and injured 563.
On May 20, 1957 , a tornado moved across southeast parts of Kansas City hitting the area of Ruskin Heights. Forty-four people were killed and 531 were injured. More than 825 homes and businesses were damaged or destroyed, including the local high school. The outbreak spread from northeast Kansas and northeast Oklahoma through Missouri into Iowa and Illinois. In all, 17 tornadoes killed 59 people and injured 665 others.
April 11-12, 1965 witnessed t he second most damaging outbreak of the century, known as the Palm Sunday outbreak. Nearly 50 tornadoes struck parts of the Great Lakes region from Wisconsin and Illinois eastward through lower Michigan and northern Ohio resulting in 256 deaths and 3, 402 injuries. Twin tornadoes moved into Goshen, Ind., destroying nearly 100 trailer homes, and a large tornado hit Russiaville, Ind., damaging or destroying 90 percent of the buildings. As many as 44 people died and 612 were injured as one tornado followed another across Steuben and Monroe Counties in lower Michigan. Tornadoes devastated areas in northern Toledo, Ohio, killing 18 people. Other tornadoes moved through areas about 15 miles southwest of Cleveland just northeast of Strongsville. Six homes literally vanished, 18 people were killed and 200 others were injured.
On April 10, 1979 , a tornado hit Wichita Falls, Texas, killing 42 people and injuring 1,740.
On May 31, 1985 , t hirty tornadoes spread out across parts of northeast Ohio into western Pennsylvania. The outbreak killed 76 people and injured 876 others. Twelve people died from one tornado that moved from Ashtabula County, Ohio, into Erie County, Penn. Sixteen people were killed by a tornado that started over Trumbull County, Ohio, then moved east/northeast across parts of Pennsylvania.
On June 7-8, 1984 , a nother outbreak moved across Iowa and Minnesota into Wisconsin. The town of Barneveld, Wisc., was hit by a tornado just before midnight. All but the water tower was demolished and nine people were killed. As many as 45 tornadoes in the entire outbreak killed 13 people.
On March 13, 1990 , p eople came from miles around to film the Hesston, Kansas, tornado, thanks to the role of video tape and the advances in media technology. One tornado started near Goshen, only to merge with a second near Hesston and track northeast to just southwest of Topeka, Kansas.
On March 27, 1994 , 22 people died in Goshen, Ala., after another notable Palm Sunday tornado hit a church .
And on May 3, 1999 , a large tornado mowed through areas of southwest Oklahoma City and Moore, Okla., demolishing or damaging more than 8,000 homes and ringing up more than $1 billion in damage. This tornado was part of an outbreak of 74 tornadoes that affected parts of Oklahoma and southern Kansas, killing 48 people.