The Secret Garden is a novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett. It first appeared serially in the fall of 1910, and was published as an entire book in 1911 The first title that Hodgson considered for the book was a quote from the nursery rhyme Mistress Mary, Quite Contrary.

This title was referred to the initial contrariness of the book's heroine, Mary, who at the start of the book is a spoiled orphan who has been brought up in India by servants. Even before her parents' death in a cholera outbreak, Mary is largely neglected by her absent and uninterested parents, and encouraged to issue orders to the servants who are charged with raising her. The absence of either love or discipline in her life, together with the "unwholesome climate" in which she lived, have left her a

sickly, sour-faced and unpleasant child.
This does not seem likely to change when she is shipped off to the home of her only remaining relative. Archibald Craven is Mary's uncle by marriage, having been married to Lilias, the sister of Mary's father. Lilias died ten years ago, and Archibald is still mourning. When at home he is a recluse; most of the time he travels abroad to get away from his sorrowful memories. His manor, and Mary, are left in the charge of Mrs. Medlock, Archibald's faithful housekeeper. The only person who really gives Mary any attention, however, is Martha Sowerby, a chambermaid.


Martha is the one who begins to pull Mary out of her accustomed petulance and sour mood. Most of the other servants spend as little time with her as possible, as she is so unpleasant, but Martha inspires Mary to change by telling her stories about her younger brother Dickon, who is happy and full of high spirits because of the joy he finds in nature, even though the family is fairly poor and live simply.


Martha also tells Mary about a special place on the grounds of the manor that was a favorite spot of the late Mrs. Craven. It is a walled flower garden that Archibald locked after Lilias died. He buried the key in an unknown spot, not being able to bear the idea that anyone should enter his beloved Lilias' private refuge. No one has entered the garden in the last ten years.
Mary is able to find the key; though at first she cannot find the door in the overgrown ivy, a robin shows her where it is concealed

(in a touch of what might be called the magical realism that Hodgson often attributed to animals and other forces of nature throughout her books).

Mary finds that although the roses are lifeless, there are other flowers that seem still to be alive. She decides that she will tend the garden and bring it back to life, but, not knowing anything about gardening, she recruits Martha's brother to help her. Dickon seems to have an almost magical touch with animals and plants, and shows Mary that while the roses have certainly been neglected, they are not beyond saving. Mary provides him with the funds to buy the supplies they need, and the two begin to reclaim the garden.


For the first time, Mary begins to develop interests in people other than herself, and in things other than those produced specifically to amuse her. She also begins to imitate Martha and Dickon's Yorkshire dialect, as they are the first to teach her certain words for the natural phenomena around her, and she begins to feel that this dialect is the best language for expressing truths about nature and about herself.


About this time, Mary's uncle returns from abroad and meets her, only for a short time, for the first time since she has arrived at his home. Feeling a bit guilty that she is engaged in an activity that she knows he would not have permitted, Mary asks her uncle if she may claim a bit of garden from any unused part of the grounds, and he grants her permission. Thanks to these new interests, Mary begins to come into bloom herself. The servants begin to remark on her changed looks and strikingly improved manners.




Mary is also brought out of herself by her curiosity regarding a mystery in her uncle's house.

More than once, she hears what seems to be sobbing coming from somewhere in the house. She asks the servants what the sound is, but they evade her questions, telling her that she must be imagining things, hearing the wind, or that one of the maids had a toothache.

Not to be deterred and still having a touch of her old self-willed nature, Mary begins to explore the house and discovers that she has a cousin.

Her uncle's son, Colin, a year or two older than Mary, is an invalid confined to bed, unable to walk, and is as lonesome, spoiled, and unpleasant as Mary used to be - and for much the same reasons. He is neglected by his father, who cannot bear to look at him both because of his resemblance to his dead mother, and because Craven is convinced that he has passed on to his son his mildly hunchbacked condition.

Colin has also become morbidly obsessed with the idea that he is becoming or will become hunchbacked, that he is weak and sickly, and that he will soon die. Because of his invalid status, Colin is coddled and spoiled, and tends to throw outrageous tantrums to get his own way. The servants manage him as best they can, and have kept Mary and Colin a secret from one another because Colin always says he cannot stand to have strangers looking at him.



Colin is glad to meet Mary, however, as she is a welcome distraction, and initially she is somewhat afraid of his sickliness and treats him gingerly.

Colin insists that Mary visit him frequently, which she does. As spring approaches, however, Colin becomes jealous that Mary is spending more time gardening with Dickon. He threatens to issue an order forbidding Dickon the grounds, but Mary has lost her fear of upsetting him and shouts right back, then slams out of the room.

Colin attempts to one-up her with his usual best weapon - a hysterical tantrum - screaming that he is developing a hunch in his back and will surely soon be dead. To the shock of the servants and of Colin himself, however, Mary does not coddle or attempt to soothe Colin out of his tantrum. Having been a spoiled, sickly child herself, Mary has no illusions about this one. She sharply tells him to stop his nonsense, and upon inspecting Colin's spine informs him that the "lumps" of which he is so terrified are no more than the shapes of normal vertebrae such as she has herself.



It turns out that the firmness and resistance Mary offers are the best thing for Colin. For the first time, someone is challenging him; also for the first time, someone else's friendship is valuable enough to him that he is willing to exert himself, even challenge himself, so that he does not lose it. Colin has never before had anything that mattered enough to him for him to make an effort to keep it.



Soon he has two such people: at Mary's encouragement, Colin agrees that she can bring Dickon to his room for a visit. Together, Mary and Dickon take Colin out to the garden in a wheelchair, and show him his mother's garden. He is enchanted with it, and repeats his visits as often as the weather permits, issuing imperious orders to the servants to keep away. In spite of these directions, the group is found one day by Ben Weatherstaff, the manor's old gardener. tried to keep the roses blooming by secretly climbing the garden's wall every six months or so. At first Ben scolds the children for what they have done, but when he sees how they have brought the garden back to life, he tells them he will not reveal their secret.

As the roses come back to life, Colin does the same. He makes a resolution: when his father next comes home, he will find Colin running and walking like a healthy boy. With Mary and Dickon's help, he undertakes a program of simple exercise and positively-focused thoughts. The three conceal Colin's greatly improving health from the servants, pretending that he is still sickly, so that they can surprise Colin's father, who is traveling through Europe.

Mr. Craven, while in Europe, hears Lilias' voice in a dream, telling him that he should return home. At about the same time, a letter reaches him written by Mrs. Sowerby (the mother of Dickon and Martha; she is in on the surprise as well). She tells him that if his wife were still living, she would ask him to return to England. Mr. Craven hurries back home. When he arrives, Mary, Colin, and Dickon are in the secret garden, and Mr. Craven, though he does not know they are there, feels compelled by some force to move in that direction. As he nears the garden, he cannot believe his ears; voices are coming from inside its walls. Next, he cannot believe his eyes: Colin races out of the garden and runs toward him, having just beaten Mary and Dickon in a garden-long dash. Mr. Craven accompanies the children back within the walls of the garden, and they explain the whole history of what they have done. The four of them walk back to the manor, and the household staff are amazed to see a pair of miracles before them: Colin striding along and Mr. Craven with a look of happiness on his face.



Major themes

The Secret Garden has several major themes. First, it promotes a simple prescription for the raising of children: that they require both love and discipline. Mary's servants in India allow her to order them around; as a result, she becomes spoiled and unpleasant, and fails to inspire affection in anyone around her. This creates a vicious cycle, as Mary becomes more lonely, more unpleasant, and more ignorant of how a child should learn to behave.

Similarly, Colin is waited upon and coddled, and allowed to essentially create and reinforce his own invalidism (though, since he has been treated as an invalid from infancy, his sense that he is sickly is not his fault). None of the servants around him enforce any sort of limits on him at all - but neither do any of them offer him any real affection. Both he and Mary immediately begin to improve when someone offers them both affection and limitations on their behavior.

This theme, simple as it is, is the starting point for some of the novel's subtler themes. For example, the novel promotes a highly romanticized vision of England's working class. And as is common among romantically idealized notions, this vision is also somewhat patronizing. For instance, none of the servants, it seems, can perceive the simple truth about child-rearing explained above. They are either completely cowed by the children's behavior, or respond with cold severity (as does Mr. Craven's housekeeper toward Mary, at first).

The positive influence of people such as Martha, Dickon, and their mother, comes from what the novel presents as their simple, good-hearted nature. They are close to the land, especially Dickon, who is shown as having almost magical powers with regard to plants and animals; they speak in a simple dialect; they are completely uncomplicated, with little or no ego. This character shows up particularly strongly in Dickon, in comparison with Colin and Mary. Colin, for example, struggles with feelings of jealousy with regard to Mary and Dickon; Dickon seems not even to understand that such feelings might exist. Neither he nor anyone in his family is ever unhappy, ever worried, ever in a dark mood - because of their simple, loving, close-to-the-land nature.

In fact, Dickon and his simple, good-hearted family could be seen as another facet of the natural world that the novel also presents as having nearly magical healing powers. Dickon's facility with living things suggests a true affinity with them. Dickon could be seen as having more in common with the robin who shows Mary the door to the garden - after all, his primary function in the novel is to connect Mary and Colin to nature and thus to healing - than he does with any of the humans in the story.

Hodgson's point seems to be that the English upper classes allow their wealth and complex social structures to divide them from what is real and true and important in life. The working classes, by contrast, or at least the population of the working class that lives in rural areas, are uncorrupted by all of the complications of wealth; they live natural, true lives, and as such can serve as guideposts to healing for the damaged victims of the upper classes' artificial, loveless lives.

This is a valid theme and one that Burnett explores to good effect; however, it is made more shallow and simplistic than it needs to be by the way it denies those working classes any complexity or true humanity of their own. In this way, Hodgson's view of the English working classes bears some resemblance to the stereotype of the "magical Negro" that came to light in twentieth-century literature and film; that is, of an African-American person who was a source of homespun, simple wisdom for some white person who had lost his way. The "magical Negro" often spoke truths far more profound than he himself realized, and these truths were put forth for the benefit of the white person - whose path was infinitely more complex and significant than the African-American character's ever was. It must be said that Burnett's stereotype is more well-intentioned than that of the magical Negro - though it is still somewhat simplistic and patronizing.

This critique, however, is one that would occur primarily to modern audiences (though one wonders what authors such as George Eliot and Thomas Harding, both of whom found themes of profound complexity among England's working and agrarian classes, and particularly in exploring the connections between these classes and the upper classes, made of The Secret Garden . Both these authors were more inclined to present the agrarian classes as the real people, and the upper classes as the corrupting influence).

Critical and audience reception



Despite the critiques outlined above, The Secret Garden effectively promotes its theme of healing through closeness to nature and tells a moving story of a family reclaimed as the garden is reclaimed. It was not particularly celebrated at the time of its publication, however. When Burnett died in 1924, her obituaries all focused on Little Lord Fauntleroy , but made no mention of The Secret Garden. Yet today, The Secret Garden is considered one of the best children's books published in the twentieth century.



It is possible that changing public acceptance of the themes Burnett focuses on accounts for the differences in the reception of these two books. Little Lord Fauntleroy tells the story of a golden child (figuratively and literally; the little boy is crowned with a head of golden curls) who ascends from a life of poverty into the English peerage, when it comes to light that he is the only remaining male heir to a ducal title. The little boy is an angel at the start of the book and an angel at the end, and he is rewarded with riches, lands, a title, and the adoration of all who surround him, including his formerly curmudgeonly grandfather (the current Duke). In fact, his seemingly otherworldly ability to love and see the good in everyone works a near-magical transformation on his grandfather, who has been not just an irascible old man, but a cruel, spiteful, and vengeful person for most of his life, as well as an unloving and unjust parent. Little Lord Fauntleroy is a largely untroubled and unquestioning rags-to-riches story, and the recipient of the riches is presented as thoroughly deserving them - though there is a hint that the reason he is so completely golden-hearted and loving is that he was raised simply and lovingly by his sweet, angelic, but poor mother.

In contrast, The Secret Garden is a more complex story and therefore perhaps a more satisfying one for modern audiences - who may also be less disturbed by what seems to be a clear privileging of the life experience of the agrarian classes over their landed owners.

Biographical notes on Frances Hodgson Burnett

It is easy to draw connecting lines between Burnett's life and the themes she espouses in her books, particularly those that are most prominent in The Secret Garden .

She grew up in poverty; after her father died in 1854, when Frances was six years old, her mother struggled to support Frances and her four siblings. The family lived in a squalid slum in Manchester. Two years later, they emigrated to Knoxille, Tennessee, to live with Frances' uncle. Here, they were no less poor, but they were in a clean, rural environment, and felt that life was better

. This contrast may show one reason why Burnett's writings often idealize the working-class agrarian life, but rarely the working-class city life.



When Frances' mother died in 1867, the eighteen-year-old was left to support her two younger siblings. She began writing short stories in order to earn the money to support the family; the magazine Godey's Lady's Book published her first story in 1868. Within a few months she was writing regularly for Godey's , as well as for several other popular magazines of the time. The primary appeal of Frances' writings at this time was the way in which she could devise a satisfyingly romantic story that also contained details of working-class lives that her readers found realistic and believable.

After getting married in 1873, to a doctor named Swan Burnett, Frances turned to writing novels and plays. Her fifth novel, written in 1886, was Little Lord Fauntleroy. It was wildly popular, selling more than half a million copies, and igniting a fashion among mothers of little boys to dress them in velvet suits with lace collars (based, if they had only known, on the garb favored by Oscar Wilde) and to grow their hair into long adorable curls (based on the hair of Burnett's own son, Vivian).

In 1890, Burnett's beloved first son, Lionel, died of consumption. Burnett was consumed by grief, and turned to Spiritualism for comfort. Before this, she had been interested in Theosophy, and she later became interested in Christian Science. Some of the ideas of all these religions can be seen in The Secret Garden. The idea, for example, that thinking positive thoughts and undertaking ritual affirmations can aid the body in healing itself, finds its roots in Theosophy.

The idea that true health and healing come not from medicine (which in The Secret Garden is shown actually to be detrimental to Colin's health) but from a healthy inner self and exposure to a healthy natural environment, is based on the teachings of Christian Science.

The influence of Spiritualism can also be seen in The Secret Gar den. Spiritualists in general believed that the dead could be contacted by or could speak to the living; Archibald Craven's rushing back home partly at the urging of his dead wife, who speaks to him in his dreams, is an embodiment of this belief. More broadly, however,

Spiritualism gave rise to a religious movement called the American New Thought Movement, whose beliefs were largely metaphysical. It was non-denominational and included a loosely affiliated group of people who believed in the power of positive thinking, "creative visualization," "life forces," and "personal power." Its Declaration of Principles declared that "our mental states are carried forward into manifestation and become our experiences in daily living."

These ideas can be seen at work in The Secret Garden when Colin undertakes a series of daily positive-thinking affirmations as part of his plan to overcome his invalid past.

The influence of New Thought and Christian Science together can be seen in the idea, which becomes evident over the course of the story, that illnesses and invalidism are more likely to be caused by mental and emotional causes - in a sense, to be self-caused - than by actual physical affliction. This idea seems to modern readers to lack credibility, given all that we now know about the biological and physiological sources of illness and disease, particularly the germ theory of contagion. It must be remembered, however, that when Burnett was writing not only were these scientific breakthroughs still in the future, but it was also fairly common for women in particular to experience illnesses that had no particular physiological cause. Weakness and infirmity were prized in women at that time, being seen as signs of delicacy and essential femininity. Women also tended to dress in ways that were not conducive to their health, one example being the tightly laced corset that prevented their ever drawing a full breath. Thus, the idea that illness, or particularly invalidism, could be a sort of self-created state, or that illness could arise largely from emotional or mental states that one could decide to alter, was not as anti-scientific at that time as it may seem today.

Other versions of The Secret Garden

Film versions



The story of The Secret Garden has been adapted many times for stage, film, and television. It was first filmed in 1919, by the Famous Players-Lasky Corporation, but the film has not been seen for decades and it is thought to be lost.

The second film version of it was made in 1949 by MGM. It starred the popular child actress Margaret O'Brien, and was mostly filmed in black-and-white, though the scenes set in the revived garden were shot in Technicolor

(similarly to how The Wizard of Oz shot its Kansas scenes in black-and-white and its Oz scenes in Technicolor). Its script adheres fairly closely to that of the novel, though one or two plots points are changed: for instance, it is Dickon rather than Martha who tells Mary about the garden, and it is a raven rather than a robin who helps them find their way in, by finding the key for them. (This is an odd substitution, as a robin is much more redolent than a raven of the symbolism of rebirth in nature that Burnett was expressing.)

In 1993, American Zoetrope created the film version of The Secret Garden that has received the most critical acclaim. It starred Dame Maggie Smith as Mrs. Medlock (suggesting that this role was expanded from its presence in the novel) and also gave more time to some themes that were only subliminal in the book. For instance, there is a scene in which Mary and Dickon are swinging in the garden and gazing at each other. They do not speak or move toward each other, but the looks on their faces suggest a burgeoning awareness of the other that Colin, who sees this, finds highly disturbing. He shouts and then screams at them to stop - but even he can hardly say what it is, exactly, that they should stop doing. The two simply turn and look at him. Modern readers of the novel will no doubt wonder what sorts of feelings might be growing in the two boys' hearts toward Mary, and whether that will cause complications as they grow older, but this is barely, if at all, hinted at in the book.

Television versions



The novel has been adapted for television several times. Its most well-known television adaption is the 1987 Hallmark Hall of Fame version in which Gennie James starred as Mary and Barret Oliveras as Dickon, and Jadrien Steele played Colin. Mary's uncle is played by renowned British actor Derek Jacobi, and his wife Lilias (who appears in some dream sequences and flashbacks) is played by Alison Doody. There is also a brief scene showing the adult Colin Craven, who is played by a now-famous Colin Firth.

The novel has also been made into television serials three times, all adapted by Dorothea Brooking. The 1952 version had eight parts, the 1960 version had six parts, and the 1975 version (which starred Colin Spaull as Dickon) had three parts.



The story has also been produced in animated versions. In one of these, an "ABC Weekend Special" produced in 1995, the role of Archibald Craven was voiced by Derek Jacobi, in a

reprise of his role in the 1987 Hallmark Hall of Fame television adaptation.

Earlier, in 1991, a Japanese animated version was created, under the title Himitsu no Hanazono.



The Secret Garden was made into a musical in 1991. It ran on Broadway for nearly two years and more than seven hundred performances. It won several Tony Awards in the Musical category, for its book, lead actress (Daisy Eagan), and set design. The set was particularly innovative, with its resemblance to the toy theatres popular in the Victorian era. It made use of oversized paper dolls, pop-outs, and collage-like elements (similar to those made famous by Joseph Cornell).



The musical's plot is largely the same as the novel's, but a few details are changed. For one thing, Mary is said by her uncle to resemble her aunt, who is named Lily here. The garden is a topiary maze, and Dickon, rather than being just a simple, good-hearted boy with a green thumb, is actually a sort of druid or nature spirit, which gives his character more complexity than it had in the novel.



A new character is introduced: Neville Craven, Archibald Craven's younger brother. He also notes Mary's likeness to her aunt, and through a song that the brothers share ("Lily's Eyes,") the audience comes to understand that Neville also loved Lily, though she never returned his love. Somewhat problematically, Neville is a physician; this makes it harder to believe that Colin would be misdiagnosed as unable to walk for his entire life. However, he later becomes a malevolent force in the story, prompted partly by his dark memories of being rejected by Lily, and dwelling on Mary's resemblance to her aunt. Neville convinces Archibald to send Mary away to boarding school, hoping to hasten the day when Archibald will leave for good and the house will belong to Neville alone.



The question of how Lily died is also somewhat different here than in the novel and in other adaptations. In the musical, she died giving birth to Colin, which was a sadly frequent occurrence in the time in which the book was set, and which would also account for how Archibald never bonded with his son. In other stage versions and at least one of the film versions, she is said to have died in the garden after falling from a tree; in another, she falls from the tree while pregnant and later dies giving birth. (This is somewhat harder to swallow; at a time when women not uncommonly died during childbirth, it is hard to imagine a nearly full-term pregnant woman climbing a tree.)



Neville and the boarding school element introduce an extra complication into the story; otherwise, the plot is largely the same, and the musical ends with Archibald coming home to find Colin beating Mary in a footrace.



Other notable stage adaptations include one commissioned by the Orlando Shakespeare Theater in 2007. April Dawn-Gladu was asked to adapt the novel for the company's children's series, called Theater for Young Audiences. In this version, it is a fall from a tree in the garden that kills Lilias. One innovative aspect of this production is that the tree from which Lilias fell is played silently by an actress. Using only movements of her body, she depicts how, as Mary and Dickon revive the garden, the tree also awakens, returns to live, and blossoms.