H ow Much Iron Do You Need?

Everyone needs Iron. It doesn't matter ifyou're a child or an adult; your body still needs Iron. Rapidgrowth increases iron needs. So does iron loss. Here are some factson iron needs at different ages and stages.

Babies store iron from their mother's bloodwhile they are in the womb. Babies born prematurely need extra ironbecause they do not have enough time in the womb to developsufficient iron stores.

Term babies are born with a large reserve ofiron, which should last at least six months. If baby does notreceive any extra dietary iron, these iron stores get used up. Thisis why formula-fed babies should receive an iron-fortified formula,beginning at birth or at least within the first few monthsafterwards. Human milk contains relatively small amounts of iron,but it is very well absorbed. So breastfed babies rarely need ironsupplements.

Between six months and one year, baby'smother-provided iron stores may run out. Because of this, yourdoctor should check your infant's hemoglobin levels around the nineand twelve month checkup, especially if your doctor suspects yourbaby is anemic because of its dietary history or if the babyappears pale.

Toddlers, ages one to three, with their finickyeating habits, may also be prone to iron deficiencyanemia.

Preschoolers and school-age children, agesthree to eleven, are not likely to become iron deficient for tworeasons: they are not growing as rapidly as they did in infancy andthey tend to eat more iron-rich foods, such ashamburgers.

Adolescents need more iron because they aregoing through a period of rapid growth, increasing their need forall nutrients.

Teenage girls and women of child-bearing ageneed approximately five milligrams a day more of dietary iron thanmen because of blood loss through menstruation.

Pregnancy increases the need for iron in orderto adequately supply two growing bodies with what they need. Also,blood volume increases during pregnancy, calling for moreiron.

Athletes require increased amounts of iron toperform well during high endurance sports. Athletes engaged inendurance training may become iron deficient due to increasedelimination of iron during prolonged vigorous exercise.

Vegans (strict vegetarians who eat no animalproducts) may be at risk for iron deficiency, since plant foods area less efficient source of iron than animal foods.

Iron deficiency among meat eaters is unusual.Most Americans eat too much meat.

Iron-deficiency anemia may be a subtle, hiddencause of poor school performance, since iron deficiency has beenshown to be linked to reduced ability to concentrate, decreasedperformance on school and intelligence tests, and a general overalldecrease in academic and work performance. When anemia iscorrected, academic performance is improved.

Types of Iron WeConsume

Humans can get iron from shots (injection) or IV (intravenous).They can also get iron from blood transfusions or by consuming(eating) iron that is in their food, or iron pills.

People consume two types of iron: non-heme and heme

Non-hem

This iron comes primarily from plants and heme iron comes primarilyfrom meat. Plants do contain tiny traces of heme iron but notenough to make a difference. Meat contains both types of iron.About 55-60% of the iron in meat is non-heme the rest is hemeiron.

Nonheme iron represents the majority of iron humans consume intheir diets and is the type of iron in most supplements. Non-hemetype of iron is inorganic and is found in grains such as rice,wheat, and oats. Non-heme iron is also found in nuts, fruits,vegetables, most iron pills, fortificants, or contaminant iron suchas from water, soil or cooking utensils. Unlike heme iron, the ironfrom all of these sources must be changed before it can beabsorbed.

Meat, especially red meat is the best source ofheme iron. When we eat meat we consume the blood proteins, thehemoglobin and myoglobin contained in the flesh of the animal. Hemeiron is easily absorbed by the body and the best source of iron forpeople who are iron deficient. Too much heme iron in the diet canincrease the risk of disease for some people with abnormal ironmetabolism such as hemochromatosis.

For persons with normal iron metabolism only 20to 25 percent of the heme iron consumed is actually absorbed. Forexample, a four-ounce hamburger contains about 3 milligrams ofiron; about 1.2 milligrams are heme and about 1.8 milligrams arenon-heme. The amount of heme iron absorbed from that 4 oz hamburgerwould be approximately a third of a milligram. Persons withabnormal iron metabolism, such as hereditary hemochromatosis canabsorb up to four times the iron as that of a person with normalmetabolism. Therefore 80-100% of heme iron can be absorbed orapproximately 1.2 milligrams from the same 4oz hamburger!

Many substances can reduce the amount of non-heme iron we absorb;these substances include tannins in coffee or tea, dairy, phytates(fiber), eggs and some types of chocolate. Calcium can impair theabsorption of both non-heme and heme iron. Therefore if a personneeds more iron, he or she should avoid these items to improve theamount of iron absorbed. But if a person has a problem of too muchiron, he or she should use these items to help lower the amount ofiron absorbed.
Good sources of dietaryiron include red meat, fish, poultry, lentils, beans, leafvegetables, tofu, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, fortified bread, andfortified breakfast cereals. Iron in low amounts is found inmolasses, teff and farina. Iron in meat (haem iron) is more easilyabsorbed than iron in vegetables, but heme/hemoglobin from redmeathas effects which may increase the likelihood of colorectalcancer. Regulation of Iron Uptake

Excessive iron can be toxic, because freeferrous iron reacts with peroxides to produce free radicals, whichare highly reactive and can damage DNA, proteins, lipids, and othercellular components. Thus, iron toxicity occurs when there is freeiron in the cell, which generally occurs when iron levels exceedthe capacity of transferrin to bind the iron.

Iron uptake is tightly regulated by the human body,which has no regulated physiological means of excreting iron. Onlysmall amounts of iron are lost daily due to mucosal and skinepithelial cell sloughing, so control of iron levels is mostly byregulating uptake. However, large amounts of ingested iron cancause excessive levels of iron in the blood because high ironlevels can damage the cells of the gastrointestinal tract,preventing them from regulating iron absorption, high bloodconcentrations of iron damage cells in the heart, liver andelsewhere, which can cause serious problems, including long-termorgan damage and even death.

Humans experience iron toxicity above 20 milligramsof iron for every kilogram of mass, and 60 milligrams per kilogramis a lethal dose.Over-consumption of iron, often the result ofchildren eating large quantities of ferrous sulfate tabletsintended for adult consumption, is one of the most commontoxicological causes of death in children under six.The DRI liststhe Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for adults as 45 mg/day. Forchildren under fourteen years old the UL is 40 mg/day.

Regulation of iron uptake is impaired in some peopleas a result of a genetic defect that maps to the HLA-H gene regionon chromosome 6. In these people, excessive iron intake can resultin iron overload disorders, such as hemochromatosis. Many peoplehave a genetic susceptibility to iron overload without realizing itor being aware of a family history of the problem. For this reason,it is advised that people do not take iron supplements unless theysuffer from iron deficiency and have consulted a doctor.Hemochromatosis is estimated to cause disease in between 0.3 and0.8% of Caucasians.

The medical management of iron toxicity is complex,and can include use of a specific chelating agent calleddeferoxamine to bind and expel excess iron from the body.

IronDeficiency

Iron deficiency is a condition resulting fromtoo little iron in the body. Iron deficiency is the most commonnutritional deficiency and the leading cause of anemia in theUnited States.

The terms anemia, iron deficiency, and irondeficiency anemia often are used interchangeably but they mean thesame thing. Iron deficiency ranges from depleted iron storeswithout functional or health impairment to iron deficiency withanemia, which affects the functioning of several organsystems.

Iron deficiency is a concern because itcan:

Iron deficiency can delay normal infant motorfunction (normal activity and movement) or mental function (normalthinking and processing skills).3-6

Iron deficiency anemia during pregnancy canincrease risk for small or early (preterm) babies.7-8 Small orearly babies are more likely to have health problems or die in thefirst year of life than infants who are born full term and are notsmall.

Iron deficiency can cause fatigue that impairsthe ability to do physical work in adults.9-10 Iron deficiency mayalso affect memory or other mental function inteens.

Signs and Symptomsof Iron Deficiency

Humans should always be observant, especiallywhen it comes to detecting sickness. Someone with early stages ofiron deficiency may have no signs or symptoms. This is why it isimportant to screen for too little iron among high riskgroups.

Signs of iron deficiency anemiainclude:

Feeling tired and weak. You justclimbed the stairs and you're already panting. You easily gettired. This can be a sign of iron deficiency.

Decreased work and school performance. It is said that anemic people function less well than non-anemicones. Although it is not yet sure if being anemic has effect on howthe brain works, we can assume that it does. After all, when you'retired, you can't fully do your work, can you?

Slow cognitive and social developmentduring childhood. Iron is one the main chemicals that your bodyneeds. So when a child lacks iron, his development can also behindered.

Difficulty maintaining bodytemperature. An anemic's body temperature often changes. Thisis because of how the blood circulates in his body.

Decreased immune function, which increasessusceptibility to infection. It's easy for anemic people to getanother kind of disease when their immune system doesn't functionwell.

Glossitis (an inflamed tongue). A lookto an anemic's tongue will show this.

Iron Fortificationof Infant Formulas

Everyone knows that iron is importantespecially for babies. Iron sufficiency is important for normalhuman growth and development.

The goal of early iron supplementation is tomeet the rapidly growing child's need for hemoglobin and tissueiron and to fortify iron stores in anticipation of later switchingto an iron-poor cow milk-based diet. The use of iron-fortifiedformulas has dramatically reduced the rate of iron-deficiencyanemia during infancy in the last 25 years.

Infants who were growth-retarded in utero orwere born to mothers with poorly controlled diabetes have reducediron stores at birth and may require further ironsupplementation.

Formula-fed infants receiving iron-fortifiedformula (up to 12 mg/L) during their first year have greaterassurance of adequate iron stores and very low rates of irondeficiency between 6 and 18 months of age.

Barriers to the use of iron-fortified formulainclude unsubstantiated fears of gastrointestinal distress,availability of low-iron formula, inappropriate comparisons withthe iron content of human milk, and inadequate and potentiallymisleading rules related to formula labeling.

There are no known medical contraindicationsto iron-fortified formulas (eg, iron overload syndromes, colic,constipation, cramps, or gastroesophageal reflux).

IronSupplements

There are multi vitamins with extra iron foreveryday use. They supply the extra iron we need if our body is lowon iron and according to the statistics it looks like most peopleare. There are many vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients that weare not getting in the foods we eat so it is a good idea to usemulti vitamins with iron to help get and keep our bodies healthy.Most of the foods we do eat are filled with preservatives,herbicides, pesticides, artificial ingredients, and other additivesthat are destroying our bodies, and the bodies of our children andgrandchildren. It was just recently reported that we are not ashealthy as our parents and grandparents and this is because of theunclean air we breath and the many chemicals in the unclean waterwe drink (some of it is in bottles) and the processed foods we eat.We need the iron supplements and the other natural supplements tohelp us get back into our bodies what we need to fight off thenasty things we have taken into our bodies. The first thing we allneed to do is flush out our system by detoxifying our digestivesystem and urinary tract system so the antioxidants can begin tofight off the free radicals.

Supplemental amountsrequired to overcome iron deficiency can cause constipation.Sometimes switching the form of iron (see "Which forms ofsupplemental iron are best?" above), getting more exercise, ortreating the constipation with fiber and fluids is helpful, thoughfiber can reduce iron absorption (see below). Sometimes the amountof iron must be reduced if constipation occurs.

Humans should also be mindful in taking upiron supplements. Like everything else, excessive iron is not good.Hemochromatosis, hemosiderosis, polycythemia, and iron-loadinganemias (such as thalassemia and sickle cell anemia) are conditionsinvolving excessive storage of iron. Supplementing iron can bequite dangerous for people with these diseases.

Some researchers have linked excess ironlevels to diabetes, cancer, increased risk of infection, systemiclupus erythematosus (SLE), exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis,and Huntington's disease. The greatest concern has surrounded thepossibility that excess storage of iron in the body increases therisk of heart disease. Two analyses of published studies came todifferent conclusions about whether iron could increase heartdisease risk. One trial has suggested that such a link may exist,but only in some people (possibly smokers or those with elevatedcholesterol levels). The link between excess iron and any of thediseases mentioned earlier in this paragraph has not beendefinitively proven. Nonetheless, too much iron causes free radicaldamage, which can, in theory, promote or exacerbate most of thesediseases. People who are not iron deficient should generally nottake iron supplements.

Patients on kidney dialysis who are giveninjections of iron frequently experience "oxidative stress". Thisis because iron is a pro-oxidant, meaning that it interacts withoxygen molecules in ways that can damage tissues. These adverseeffects of iron therapy may be counteracted by supplementation withvitamin E.

Supplementation with iron, or iron and zinc,has been found to improve vitamin A status among children at highrisk for deficiency of the three nutrients.

People with hepatitis C who have failed torespond to interferon therapy have been found to have higheramounts of iron within the liver. Moreover, reduction of ironlevels by drawing blood has been shown to decrease liver injurycaused by hepatitis C. Therefore, people with hepatitis C shouldavoid iron supplements.

In some people, particularly those withdiabetes, insulin resistance syndrome, or liver disease, a geneticsusceptibility to iron overload has been reported.

Foods ThatInterfere and Increase Iron Absorption

Foods, beverages and supplements thatinterfere with iron absorption include Green tea (Camellia sinensis). Thiseffect may be desirable for people with iron overload diseases,such as hemochromatosis. The inhibitory effect of green tea on ironabsorption was 26% in one study. Coffee (Coffea arabica, C. robusta). Red wine, particularly the polyphenolcomponent (also found in tea) . Since wine is also a dietarysource of iron, it is not clear whether drinking red wine wouldlead to a deficiency of iron. Phytate (phytic acid). found inunleavened wheat products such as matzoh, pita, and some ryecrackers; in wheat germ, oats, nuts, cacao powder, vanilla extract,beans, and many other foods, and in IP-6 supplements. Whole wheat bran, independent of its phytatecontent, has been shown to inhibit iron absorption. Calcium from food and supplements interfereswith heme-iron absorption. Soy protein. Eggs

Foods and supplementsthat increase iron absorption include

Meat, poultry, and fish. Although vitamin C increases iron absorption,the effect is relatively minor. Taking vitamin A with iron helps treat irondeficiency, since vitamin A improves the absorption and/orutilization of iron. Although soy protein has been shown todecrease iron absorption (see above), certain soy-containing foods(e.g. tofu, miso, tempeh) have significantly improved ironabsorption. Some soy sauces may also enhance ironabsorption. Alcohol, but not red wine, has been reportedto increase the absorption of ferric, but not ferrous,iron. Iron has been reported to potentiallyinterfere with manganese absorption. In one trial, women with highiron status had relatively poor absorption of manganese. In anothertrial studying manganese/iron interactions in women, increasedintake of "non-heme iron"-the kind of iron found in mostsupplements-decreased manganese status. These interactions suggestthat taking multiminerals that include manganese may protectagainst manganese deficiencies that might otherwise be triggered bytaking isolated iron supplements. On the whole, researchindicates that the dietary intake of iron by vegetarians,particularly in the case of vegans, meets or exceeds the RDI. Thekey question, however, is not how much iron is consumed, but howmuch is actually absorbed, and, consequently, whether the ironstatus of vegetarians and vegans is adequate.

Even taking into considerationfactors like vitamin C intake and use of leavened bread,vegetarians absorb less iron from their diets than non-vegetarians.Some research has suggested that some vegetarians may absorb onlyabout 10 percent of the iron in their diet while omnivores absorbabout 18 percent.

It is likely that some adaptationto lower iron intakes takes place. One study has found thatvegetarians lost far less iron from their intestines, compared toomnivores. And in men consuming a diet with low ironbio-availability, iron absorption increased over time.

Typically, due to the reducedabsorption of non-haem iron in comparison to haem iron, the amountof stored iron of vegetarians and vegans is substantially lowerthan that of non-vegetarians, but their stores are just as likelyto be adequate. And despite these lower stores, most studies haveshown that the incidence of iron-deficiency anaemia in vegetariansis not significantly different from that in the generalpopulation.

It is important to note here thatwith iron deficiency anemia being relatively common among omnivorewomen, the fact that vegetarian women are no more likely to bedeficient in iron is not a reason for them to be complacent aboutthis important mineral.

Although the incidence ofiron-deficiency anemia in vegetarians is not significantlydifferent from that in non-vegetarians, vegetarians should not becomplacent about iron. And despite the fact that adaptation maytake place, it is important for vegetarians to eat a diet thatemphasises iron-rich foods and enhances iron absorption. Irondeserves attention in the diets of everyone.

For people concerned about theiriron level a simple blood test at a local medical centre will givean indication of their current iron status. For people concernedthat their dietary intake of iron may not be adequate, werecommended that they see an Accredited Practising Dietitian whospecialises in vegetarian nutrition.

Diseases of Iron Metabolism

A well-balanced diet containssufficient iron to meet body requirements. About 10% of the normal10 to 20 mg of dietary iron is absorbed each day, and this issufficient to balance the 1 to 2 mg daily losses from desquamationof epithelia. Greater iron utilization via growth in childhood,greater iron loss with minor hemorrhages, menstruation in women,and greater need for iron in pregnancy will increase the efficiencyof dietary iron absorbtion to 20%.

Iron is mainly absorbed in theduodenum and upper jejunum. A transporter protein called divalentmetal transporter 1 (DMT1) facilitates transfer of iron across theintestinal epithelial cells. DMT1 also facilitates uptake of othertrace metals, both good (manganese, copper, cobalt, zinc) and bad(cadmium, lead). Absorbed iron is bound in the bloodstream by theglycoprotein named transferrin. Normally, about 20 to 45% oftransferrin binding sites are filled (the percent saturation).About 0.1% of total body iron is circulating in bound form totransferrin. Most absorbed iron is utilized in bone marrow forerythropoiesis. Membrane receptors on erythroid precursors in thebone marrow avidly bind transferrin. About 10 to 20% of absorbediron goes into a storage pool, which is also being recycled intoerythropoiesis, so there is a balance of storage and use. The traceelements cobalt and manganese are also absorbed and transported viathe same mechanisms as iron.

Three mechanisms regulate ironabsorption:

Dietary regulator: a short-term increase indietary iron is not absorbed as the mucosal cells have accumulatediron and "block" additional uptake. Stores regulator: as body iron stores fall,the mucosa is signalled to moderately increaseabsorbtion. Erythropoietic regulator: in response toanemia the erythroid cells will signal the mucosa to increase ironabsorbtion more significantly.

The composition of the diet mayalso influence iron absorbtion. Citrate and ascorbate (in citrusfruits, for example) can form complexes with iron that increaseabsorbtion, while tannates in tea can decrease absorbtion. The ironin heme found in meat is more readily absorbed than inorganic ironby an unknown mechanism. The ferrous form of iron is more readilyabsorbed than ferric iron. Duodenal microvilli contain ferricreductase to promote absorbtion of ferrous iron.

Only a small fraction of thebody's iron is gained or lost each day. Most of the iron in thebody is recycled when old red blood cells are taken out ofcirculation and destroyed, with their iron scavenged by macrophagesin the mononuclear phagocyte system, and returned to the storagepool for re-use. Iron homeostasis is closely regulated viaintestinal absorption. Increased absorption is signalled bydecreasing iron stores, hypoxia, and erythropoieticactivity.

Storage iron occurs in twoforms:

Ferritin Hemosiderin

Iron is initially stored asferritin, but ferritin can be incorporated by phagolysosomes tohemosiderin. There are about 2 gm of iron in the adult female, andup to 6 gm iron in the adult male. About 1.5 to 2 gm of this totalis found in red blood cells as heme in hemoglobin, and 0.5 to 1 gmoccur as storage iron, with the remainder in myoglobin and inenzymes that require iron.

Laboratory testing for iron mayinclude tests for:

Serum iron Serum iron binding capacity Serum ferritin Complete blood count (CBC) Bone marrow biopsy Liver biopsy

The simplest tests that indirectlygive an indication of iron stores are the serum iron and ironbinding capacity, with calculation of the percent transferrinsaturation. The serum ferritin correlates well with iron stores,but it can also be elevated with liver disease, inflammatoryconditions, and malignant neoplasms. The CBC will also give anindirect measure of iron stores, because the mean corpuscularvolume (MCV) can be decreased with iron deficiency. The amount ofstorage iron for erythropoiesis can be quantified by performing aniron stain on a bone marrow biopsy. Excessive iron stores can bedetermined by bone marrow and by liver biopsies.

Hereditary Hemochromatosis Hereditary hemochromatosis (HHC) is anautosomal recessive disorder of iron metabolism. The incidence forHHC is between 1:200 and 1:500 for populations of NorthernEuropean, Caucasian descent. The genetic defect likely arose in aCeltic population in the early Middle Ages and may have provided aselective advantage to persons living under conditions in whichiron deficiency was common and for whom the life expectancy was inthe 40's. The gene frequency is as high as 1:9, or 11% of personswith this ancestry.

Iron deposition in many organs occurs. Theexcess iron affects organ function, presumably by direct toxiceffect. Excessive iron stores exceed the body's capacity to chelateiron, and free iron accumulates. This unbound iron promotes freeradical formation in cells, resulting in membrane lipidperoxidation and cellular injury. The major affected organ withcomplications of HHC are: Liver, with cirrhosis Heart, with cardiomyopathy Pancreas, with diabetes mellitus Skin, with pigmentation Joints, with polyarthropathy Gonads, with hypogonadotrophichypogonadism All of these complications are much morecommonly seen because of other diseases in the population, sowithout a family history or genetic testing, HHC will not besuspected. It should be noted that, throughout most of humanhistory, the average lifespan was not great enough to allowmanifestation of HHC, so the appearance of persons withcomplications of HHC is a relatively modernphenomenon.
The treatment of HHC is simple: therapeuticphlebotomy to remove excess iron. The most common causes of deathin individuals with HHC are hepatocellular carcinoma associatedwith cirrhosis, hepatic failure, and cardiac failure. There appearsto be a subgroup of young patients who present with severe cardiacinvolvement and in whom outcome is poor as a result of congestiveheart failure if they remain untreated. In one series of patientswho presented with cardiomyopathy associated with hemochromatosis,therapeutic phlebotomy improved the prognosis in 70%; untreatedpatients had a worsening of their condition and mean survival ofonly one year. The gene associated with HHC is located onchromosome 6. This locus is associated with the HLA A-3 antigen.Seventy percent of HHC individuals have the HLA A-3 genotype,whereas it is present in only 25% of normal individuals. HFE genetesting for the C282Y mutation is a cost-effective method ofscreening relatives of patients with herediatary hemochromatosis.Measurement of transferrin saturation and ferritin are lessspecific methods of screening. Early diagnosis and institution oftherapeutic phlebotomy can prevent the above manifestations andnormalize life expectancy, but once organ damage is established,many of the manifestations are irreversible.
Anemia of Chronic Disease
This is a condition in which there isimpaired utilization of iron, without either a deficiency or anexcess of iron. The probable defect is a cytokine-mediated blockagein transfer of iron from the storage pool to the erythroidprecursors in the bone marrow. The defect is either inability tofree the iron from macrophages or to load it onto transferrin. Theresult is a normochromic, normocytic anemia in which total serumiron is decreased, but iron binding capacity is reduced as well,resulting in a normal to decreased saturation. This condition istreated by treating the underlying condition.
Disease processes that may lead to anemia ofchronic disease can include:
Chronic infections Ongoing inflammatory conditions (e.g.,inflammatory bowel diseases, vasculitides) Autoimmune diseases Neoplasia