Orange County Convention Center first to receive certification for recycling efforts

The Orange County Convention Center's (OCCC) Building Services section has received International Organization for Standardization (ISO*) 14001:2004 certification for its Environmental Management System (EMS). It is the first convention center in the United States to receive this certification.

As a participant in the national EMS initiative (2003-2005), the OCCC was able to accomplish a number of achievements through initial implementation of an EMS in Building Services' recycling program. Prior to the EMS, the OCCC recycled less than one percent of its total waste stream. Through EMS, the OCCC's accomplishments include (as of July 2008): In 2007, 80% of all dry waste and 38% recovery on all waste 11,145 tons of material diverted for remanufacture 1,200 tons of cardboard and 14 tons of office paper recycled $85,000 in disposal fees saved $53,486 in recycling rebates Streamlined communications concerning environmental practices Increased environmental awareness among employees Recently completed a pilot test of "dry cell" cart batteries that contain no liquid electrolyte and are 100% recyclable Currently looking at ways to better identify recycle receptacles to promote recycling efforts to guests and encourage participation ORLANDO, Fla - June 10, 1998 - The Tourism Development Council (TDC) mettoday to review the masterplan detailing the expansion of Orlando'sOrange County Convention Center (OCCC). The group voted to endorsethe masterplan to expand the center to three million square feet by theyear 2025. The next step is for a final approval by the Board of CountyCommissioners (BCC), which is expected to come Tuesday, June 16, duringtheir meeting in the Orange County Administration Building downtown at4 p.m.

Directly following this meeting, OCCC Executive Director Tom Ackertand Jeff Sachs, a Strategic Advisory Group partner who oversaw the masterplandevelopment with Ernst Young LLP, will be made available to answer questionsfrom press and media contacts, as desired.

The approvals open the door for the nation's second-largest conventioncenter to maintain an edge on the competition which surrounds the conventionand meetings industry throughout the country. The OCCC is well-situatedfor this growth -- it is presently the USA's second-largest premier, full-serviceconvention center, located in the lowest-priced convention destinationin the nation, with more hotel rooms than almost any other marketplace.

Still, the call for space is tearing at the existing seams: The CentralFlorida area is in high demand, with recent polls showing more than 90percent of association planners desire Orlando as their top meeting destination.In addition, the OCCC has had to turn away nearly 160 groups with morethan 10,000 attendees each within the last 14 months, due to lack of spaceavailability. An approval by the BCC next week will allow the expansionto three million square feet to be completed in three stages of 680,000square feet each.

"The next phase of growth takes us where we should be -- at the helmof one of the most beneficial opportunities for our community," said ExecutiveDirector Tom Ackert. "Every delegate who enters our doors presently spendsapproximately $1,200 within our community. At the end of the year, thisequates to an impressive $2.3 billion in economic impact. This touchesevery man, woman and child in Orange County by lowering taxes and generatingadditional business for a healthy economy," he added. Following the Phase V expansion, the center is projected to generatemore than 5 million room nights and an additional 21,600 new jobs to thearea, while generating an additional $1.4 billion in economic activityand $55 million in taxes. This would increase the impact on the state'seconomy to $3.7 billion.




Surf Expo-USA - 14-JAN-09 to 17-JAN-09
Surf Expo has been at the forefront of the Board, Beach & Fashion industries - helping retailers and manufacturers meet in an environment that reflects the excitement of our culture, while still maintaining a business-first buying and selling atmosphere.

Shot Show - 15-JAN-09 to 18-JAN-09
Shot Show is the largest and most comprehensive marketplace for all professionals serving the shooting sports and hunting industries. The Shooting Hunting Outdoor Tradeshow (SHOT) is the worldwide annual gathering that unites manufacturer and retailer and all other industry stakeholders to trade, source and learn about the latest products, innovations and trends in the shooting sports industry. Orlando Gift Show - 24-JAN-09 to 26-JAN-09
Orlando Gift Show will offer Florida retailers an opportunity to explore more than 500 booths filled with some of the biggest and best-selling product lines. As the largest and longest running temporary gift event in Florida, the Orlando Gift Show features an unrivaled selection from resort and souvenir to stationery, table top, home furnishings and more.

GIFT SHOW-Orlando - 24-JAN-09 to 26-JAN-09
Gift Show is a dedicated event showcasing the finest in giftware and homeware products. At Gift Show your company will make face to face contact with leading buyers from all over the world. The Orlando Gift Show presents hundreds of exhibiting companies, including leading Southeastern sales representatives and top manufacturers, showcasing items in virtually every product category.

PGA Merchandise Show - 29-JAN-09 to 31-JAN-09
The PGA Merchandise Show is the premier marketplace for golf manufacturers, course management, apparel, and other golf related products and services. By providing both attendees and exhibitors with the forum to network and further develop their careers through Educational Conferences, as well as the opportunity to test products first hand through interactive events, The PGA Merchandise Show is unmatched within the industry.

Imprinted Sportswear Show-Orlando - 20-FEB-09 to 22-FEB-09
This Midwest event is the meeting place for the industry dedicated solely to the ever-changing apparel, sportswear, embroidery, screen-printing and promotional products industry. Join ISS, where the industry will come together to conduct business, create networking opportunities, launch new products and learn first hand how to improve ROI, increase production, decrease costs, and more.

International New Age Show - Inats East - 20-FEB-09 to 23-FEB-09
International New Age Show - Inats East is the premier market in the United States designed specifically to meet the needs of retailers featuring New Age and related products. Products represented include: Books, New Age and World Music, Audio and Video Tapes as well as Aromatherapy Bath and Body Preparations, Apparel, Candles, Crystals, Tarots and Divination Tools, Health and Wellness, Herbal Remedies, Incense, Jewelry, Native Traditions and Greeting Cards.

Surface Fabrication & Design Expo - 20-FEB-09 to 21-FEB-09
Surface Fabrication & Design Expo is the premier event for the surfacing industry. Designed by industry professionals for industry professionals, the Expo is a dynamic environment for professional education, innovation, and advancement. Now in its 8th year, the show attracts over 3,500 attendees from across the US, Europe, and Asia.

American Contract Manufacturers Show (AmCon-Orlando) - 04-MAR-09 to 05-MAR-09
American Contract Manufacturers Show (AmCon-Orlando) will feature suppliers of job shop and contract manufacturing services from throughout Canada and the U.S. Attendees will find sources for Design, Engineering, Prototyping, Machining, Fabricating, Forming, Finishing, Assembly and Electrical/Electronic Manufacturing Services.

AGG1 Aggregates Fourm & Expo 2009 - 09-MAR-09 to 12-MAR-09
AGG1 Aggregates Forum & Expo 2009 focuses exclusively on the aggregates industry, & is the industry's leading exposition and education resource. AGG1 features in-depth industry-focused educational programming & comprehensive exhibits showcasing the latest technologies & innovations in aggregates-related equipment, products and services.

World of Asphalt focuses exclusively on the asphalt industry, and is the industry's leading exposition and education resource. World of Asphalt features in-depth industry-focused educational programming, equipment demonstrations and comprehensive exhibits showcasing the latest technologies and innovations in asphalt-related equipment, products and services. Electronic House Expo - 11-MAR-09 to 14-MAR-09
Electronic House Expo is designed for custom electronics professionals (CE pros) of all kinds and skill levels. It has established itself as the only event focused on the broad market of custom electronic integration and retailing, and brings insight into the latest trends and innovations that drive this industry.

International Sign Expo - 15-APR-09 to 18-APR-09
International Sign Expo will be positioned as a premier show offering visitors opportunity to source for all their needs and see the latest technological developments in the SIGNAGE industry. The show will provide an unparalleled opportunity for the manufacturers and distributors to showcase their existing range and launch new products.
Infocomm - 13-JUN-09 to 19-JUN-09
Infocomm is an exhibition that truly incorporates the strategic linkage between telecom infrastructure, enterprise networking, corporate computing, and software applications. Telecommunications, technology and business professionals, featuring industry panels, conference sessions and interactive exhibits focusing on innovation, mobility, messaging and entertainment.

Furniture & Accessory Market-Orlando - 21-AUG-09 to 23-AUG-09 Furniture & Accessory Market gives a fair scope of furniture manufacturers. This Exhibition has every right to be called one of the largest and prestigious shows of furniture, fittings and interior design.

Florida Restaurant & Lodging Show - 11-SEP-09 to 13-SEP-09
The Florida Restaurant & Lodging Show is the best-equipped, most comprehensive marketplace for all professionals serving the foodservice and hospitality industries in the Southeast. Orlando Home Show - 18-SEP-09 to 20-SEP-09
Orlando Home Show has expanded and its better than ever with more diverse exhibits, more categories and more interactive presentations on the fabulous stage! The show offers a unique and broad selection of home improvement-related businesses. You'll enjoy various entertaining features and special guest speakers. Get ideas, investigate new products, gather information and meet the professionals to help you make your next remodeling, renovation, or decorating project a breeze!

Florida Industrial Woodworking Expo
Date: 24-SEP-09 to 25-SEP-09
Florida Industrial Woodworking Expo is aimed to position the market segment of the woodworking equipment and demonstrate the new achievements in this sphere. It is dedicated solely to the secondary wood-products industry featuring the latest machines, the hottest technology, and hard-to-find supplies.

WEFTEC Expo
Date: 10-OCT-09 to 14-OCT-09
WEFTEC Expo offers an unparalleled educational and training experience for anyone committed to water, sanitation, public health and the environment. WEFTEC offers the best water quality education and training available today and is a leading source for water quality developments, research, regulations, solutions, and cutting-edge technologies.

Diving Equipment & Marketing Association Show (DEMA)
Date: 04-NOV-09 to 07-NOV-09
Diving Equipment & Marketing Association Show is the only international trade event for the diving, action water sports and adventure travel industries. More than 10,000 professionals will gather in Orlando, Florida, November 4-7, 2009 to combine business, pleasure, education and dive industry advancement - for a winning combination.

Performance Racing Industry Show
Date: 10-DEC-09 to 12-DEC-09
Performance Racing Industry Show will be a forum where global auto brands compete with each other to offer the latest and best in every category, from an entire new generation of vehicles to state-of-the-art components.

AG CONNECT EXPO
Date: 12-JAN-10 to 15-JAN-10
AG CONNECT Expo provides a world-class international forum for agriculture industry professionals to share global agricultural ideas and management trends. AG CONNECT Expo features exhibits of the latest industry innovations, products and technology as well as a comprehensive education program and extensive networking opportunities with industry experts worldwide.

InterContinental Resort & Residences Orlando at Palazzo Del Lago
an official hotel of the Orange County Convention Center nestles on 42 acres on International Drive and Lake Bryan in Lake Buena Vista.
Its Italian Renaissance-inspired design features classical elements that integrate modern, state-of-the-art amenities.

Developed by Hospitality Development Group of Fort Lauderdale, the $1.2 billion Palazzo Del Lago will comprise the InterContinental Resort & Residences Orlando, the largest InterContinental worldwide. It will contain 1,260 luxury hotel rooms, of which 778 will be sold as hotel condos. In addition The Villas at Palazzo Del Lago will feature 800 resort residences in four separate 18-story towers.

The resort hotel and hotel residences will be managed by IHG Management (Maryland) LLC, an affiliate of InterContinental Hotels Group companies. All of the resort's hotel guest suites and residential condominiums will come completely furnished and detailed with traditional furnishings and artwork, in addition to large balconies with spectacular views.

The community's lakefront site will include approximately 300 feet of white sand beaches on Lake Bryan, as well as a 17,000 square-foot world-class destination spa, fine dining restaurants, water sports, tennis and smart building technology. It is also less than five minutes away from Walt Disney World®, and other Orlando theme parks, businesses, and local attractions.

Prices for the hotel-condos and Villas start from the $400,000s.

The $1.5 million sales center is now open on International Drive. Exclusive sales and marketing through Palazzo International Realty, LLC. For more information, visit palazzodellago.com or call toll-free in the U.S. (866) 750-8866; local phone: (407) 238-4747.



The Rosen Center

In a city known as a world-class destination, Orlando Florida, this award-winning Orlando hotel establishes a spectacular standard of meeting quality. Exceptional facilities, a highly respected staff and one of Orlando's most beautiful accommodations assure comprehensive, in-house solutions to the meeting needs of groups ranging from 10 to 4,000. A perfect location adjacent to the Orange County Convention Center in Orlando Florida makes Rosen Centre Hotel an ideal headquarters. Impressive meeting capabilities combine with resort-style luxury, minutes from all of Orlando famous attractions. Delegates enjoy a productive business environment and a superb Orlando vacation opportunity.

An extensive array of guest services fulfills a variety of needs

*Regular transportation to Orlando International Airport with Mears Transportation or by calling Star Taxi: (407) 857-9999

*On-site car rental, gift shop, valet and photo finishing

*On-site covered garage provides secure parking

*In-room high-speed Internet (Click Here for details)

*On-site IKON Business Center offers photocopying, fax, secretarial and other office services

Adjacent to the Orange County Convention Center, Rosen Centre Hotel is just 12 minutes from Orlando International Airport. Guests enjoy easy proximity to all theme park attractions, golf and shopping

Orlando Orange County Convention Center South and West Concourses are located on International Drive, convenient to I-4 and Route 528 (The Beachline Expressway). The North Concourse entrance is on Universal Boulevard, also convenient to I-4 and Route 528 (The Beachline Expressway).

The Orange County Convention Center (OCCC) is a world unto itself and bills itself as he Center of Hospitality Orlando Florida is the best place to hold a convention; it just about begs you to bring the entire family with you! With the abundance of family style hotels, variety of restaurants, the miles and miles of shopping and all of the theme parks and family attractions!

For those exhibiting or attending a convention, event or trade show at the OCCC, the following amenities are available (some charges may apply): ATM Bag & Coat Check Business Center Concierge/Guest Services Dining I-Ride Trolley Stop Lynx Bus Stop
Massage Self-Parking Shoe Shine Valet Parking Wireless Internet Access

Not to be outdone, the Orange County Convention Center is pleased to provide catering and restaurant service with their in-house evy Restaurants There are three restaurant locations, all with seated service and a view of the exhibit halls below. The Northside and Southside Restaurants both feature full bar service, wood-burning stoves and Levy Restaurants Chef Table. The Osprey Cafalso offers full bar service and Panini sandwiches, always prepared fresh! Hours of operation will coincide with show activity. A quick bite in the food court or a cup of coffee at one of the concession stands is always an option. Be sure to explore the exhibit areas, as there are usually portable food carts nearby!

For information about meetings and special events at Orlando Orange County Convention Center, please visit the website link at the bottom of this page.

Our properties are conveniently located near all area attractions and activities. Each hotel is staffed with friendly and experienced personnel and it is their goal to help make your visit a memorable one. All stays are eligible for participation in either the Choice Privilegesor Wyndham Rewardsprograms.
The Peabody Orlando offers a full range of Orlando hotel packages and specials to appeal to all ages and tastes. Choose from our distinguished collection of Orlando hotel specials, designed to help you fulfill your dream vacation in this traveler's paradise, including: Lights…Camera…Action Package The Peabody Touch Of Romance The Peabody Escape Click here for more about our Hot Dates for Meetings & Group Specials Lights…Camera…Action Package*... Hooray for Hollywood! With our Lights…Camera…Action package, you'll feel like a movie star when you check into The Peabody Orlando and experience Universal's Island of Adventure and the Universal Orlando theme parks, which are just minutes from our front drive. The package includes: Peabody Superior guestroom One-day admission for two adults to Universal's Island of Adventure and Universal Orlando theme parks** Complimentary valet parking Evening turndown Rate: $229 per night including tax, (two-night minimum stay) in a Superior Room. Additional nights at value rate plus tax.

Click here for Rates & Availability.

*Package is subject to availability; some restrictions may apply

** Universal Orlando Parks and Clubs tickets are valid for seven consecutive days from day of first use, and are not valid for separately ticketed concerts and special events. Some venues require 21 or older for admission. Proof of ID required. Does not include admission to Universal Cineplex. "The Peabody Touch of Romance" Orlando Hotel Package… Devote the evening to romance with a luxury vacation in this magical place. Treat your special someone to an evening in one of our deluxe guest rooms, and enjoy complimentary champagne, flowers, and welcome cocktails for two. Dinner is on the house at Capriccio Grill Italian Steakhouse, our renowned restaurant specializing in U.S. Prime Steaks and chops, seafood and pasta. This heartwarming and romantic Orlando hotel package includes: One night's luxurious deluxe accommodations Bottle of champagne Bouquet of flowers Welcome cocktails for two $150 Credit for Dinner at Capriccio Grill Italian Steakhouse Complimentary Full American breakfast for two (room service or B-Line Diner) Access to the Peabody Athletic Club VIP turndown service Complimentary valet parking. Rate $450 for the first night including tax; additional nights available at $225 plus tax. Guest is responsible for additional charges or values over allotted amounts.*

Click here for Rates & Availability.

*Package subject to availability, some restrictions may apply. "The Peabody Escape" Orlando Luxury Vacation Package… Make your escape from everyday hassles with this indulgent Peabody Orlando hotel package. Pampering begins with deluxe guestroom accommodations and complimentary valet parking. Savor some of the finest cuisines in any of our award-winning restaurants. Designed for total relaxation, this Orlando luxury vacation package includes: One night stay in luxurious deluxe accommodations Complimentary Continental Breakfast for two (room service or B-Line Diner) $100 food and beverage vouchers to be used during stay Complimentary use of Peabody Athletic Club Free valet parking Rate: $299 per per night including tax; additional nights available at $199 plus tax. Guest is responsible for additional charges or values over allotted amounts.*

Click here for Rates & Availability.

*All packages are subject to change without notice, based on availability and not offered to groups or conventions. Food and beverage credits must be used in outlets during actual stay.

Click here for more about Local Orlando Conventions & Events.

Experience the elegance and Southern hospitality traditions of The Peabody Orlando - a Mobil Four-Star, AAA Four Diamond hotel located directly across from the Orange County Convention Center.

Key Features:

" Clean and friendly environment

" Conveniently located from I-4

" Minutes to most of the areas attractions

" Complimentary Wireless High Speed Internet

" Free Weekday Newspaper

" Free HOT American Breakfast

" Free Coffee/Juice 6am - 9pm

" Safe Deposit Boxes at Front Desk

" Outdoor swimming pool

" Valet Dry Cleaning

" Vending Machines

" Sundry Shop

" Business Center

" Fax Service

" Wake-up Service

" Room Service Provided by UNO Chicago Grill

" Children 17yrs and under stay free

Special need rooms

" TDD (TTY) Phone available on request

" Service animals allowed for persons with disabilities

" Courteous Staff


All rooms feature free high-speed Internet access and a host of other amenities including a coffee maker, hairdryer, and iron w/ironing board. Check into the Ramada Convention Centre I-drive Orlando today!


All guests will enjoy a complimentary continental breakfast and access to the hotel's heated outdoor pool. Free USA Today newspapers are available each morning in the hotel lobby.

Nearby Restaurants (All within one mile):

" Crab House (Sea Food)

" Friendly's (American)

" Kobe (Japanese)

" Pizzeria Uno (Italian)

" TGI Friday's (American)

Nearby Shops:

" The Mercado (1 Block)

" Pointe Orlando (1 Mile)

" Orlando Premium Outlets (5 Miles)

" Millenia Mall (7 Miles)

" The Florida Mall (7 Miles)




Trade Show & Convention Guidelines & Information

A trade show at the Orange County Convention Center is defined as an exhibition of products and/or services held for members of a common or related industry. Trade shows are not open to the general public. Rental of Exhibit Hall space is based on a minimum net square foot (nsf) guarantee or the actual nsf used, whichever is greater. Net square footage is defined as total display area less aisle space and food service areas. Net square footage will include revenue-generating displays in public areas and meeting rooms.

A convention at the Orange County Convention Center is defined as an event where the primary activity of the attendees is to attend educational sessions, participate in meetings/discussions, socialize or attend other organized events. There is a secondary exhibitor component. Exhibition halls utilized for general session, poster sessions or for other non-exhibit purposes will be charged on a per day rate.

Complimentary Services Air conditioning or heating up to twelve (12) show hours per day (conditions apply) Custodial services for restrooms, meeting rooms, food and beverage areas and public areas throughout the event (does not include bulk trash, crates, lumber and packing materials) Dressing rooms with the Chapin Theater, Valencia Room and Lecture Hall Event utility labor for show management Exhibition hall public address system with one (1) wired microphone First Aid Room for medical services provider In-house permanent sound systems and House lighting Initial set-up (theater, classroom, conference, banquet or reception style - within the limits of the OCCC's inventory) for meeting rooms and exhibition halls used for banquets or sessions Registration space in public areas that includes air conditioning Registration and Show offices, where available Twenty-four (24) hour building security in the public halls, corridors and grounds

Meeting Room Allocations A proportional amount of meeting space is provided at no charge with rental of exhibition space. Meeting rooms are provided one (1) day prior to the first show day through the last show day. Meeting room space shall not be assigned or sublet to others.

Trade Show & Convention Scheduling Term


First priority for scheduling facilities and dates in the Orange County Convention Center is available to regional, national and international conventions, trade shows, corporate meetings and similar activities which are not normally open to the general public which generate significant attendance and meet peak night occupancy levels.


Book a Trade Show or Convention at the OCCC


For more information regarding booking your event and to find out more about the services offered at the Orange County Convention Center, please call our Marketing Division toll-free on (800) 345-9845 or email us at Marketing@occc.net.
The Orange County Convention Center extends a warm welcome to executive groups. While your meeting attendees enjoy all the wonderful amenities that the Orange County Convention Center has to offer, our unsurpassed meeting professionals ensure that all clients feel like VIP's.

Once your space and dates have been selected, planning with your executive meeting event coordinator begins. When organizing your meeting at the Orange County Convention Center, remember the following items are included with your room rental:

Meeting room set-up Pads & Pens Bottled water service for head tables and lecterns Lock change for meeting space containing event materials Complimentary audio patch fees

Parking considerations 2 VIP parking spaces Up to 20 complimentary staff parking passes

Directional Assistance Specific interior event signage (Way Finding) Event specific directional roadway signage (Dynamic Message System)

Complimentary Client Services Complimentary show radio Complimentary Meeting planner "tool kit", which includes office supplies and other necessary tools Complimentary use of Internet Service at any of the four locations of our on-site business center service partner

Additional Client Services Available Package acceptance and delivery to meeting rooms via our on-site business center service partner Luggage cart to move materials via our on-site business center service partner Business Center Services

To discuss holding your next executive meeting at the Orange County Convention Center, please email Marketing@occc.net or call (800) 345-9845.



