The Secret Garden, aclassicnovelby FrancesHodgson Burnett, was first published in 1911.Beforepublication is was known as Mistress Mary, iareference to thenursery rhyme Mary,Mary, Quite Contrary.

The story tells of an orphan girl who comes fromIndia to live with her Uncle at Misselthwaite Manor in England. Shediscovers a secret, hidden walled garden that has been locked upand neglected. With the help of Dickon, a local boy, they bring thegarden back to a state of beauty, and along the way they discoverthe secret as to why the garden has been locked up and neglectedfor so long.

Let us look at the story inmoredepth. Mary Lennox is a sickly, pale little girl, born inIndiato wealthy British parents. Her parents give her littleattention andshe is cared for by a subservient Ayah from her birthand told tokeep out of sight lest her unsightly appearance upsether mother andfather. When a choleraepidemic makes her an orphan(in some of the film versions it's anearthquake),she is sent toMisselthwaite Manor, an isolated country house inEngland where sheis again left alone by her new guardian, her UncleArchibald Craven,a widower still mourning his wife, who died tenyears earlier. Hetravels often, leaving the manor in the charge ofhis housekeeper,the stern Mrs. Medlock. The only person who has anytime for Mary ischambermaid, Martha, who tells Mary about a walledgarden that wasthe late Mrs. Craven's favourite. No one has enteredthe gardensince she died because her grieving husband locked itsentrance andburied the key.



While exploring the grounds, Mary finds the key, whenshe sees arobin digging for worms. The robin shows her the way tothe door thatis hidden behind a lot of overgrown ivy. Inside thegarden, at firstall seems dead, but she finds some shoots of life.She realises thegarden could grow again and decides to look afterthe garden herself.Although she wants to keep it a secret, sheshares the secret withMartha's brother Dickon, who has a way withplants and wild animals.Mary gives him money to buy gardeningimplements and he shows herthat the roses, though neglected, arenot dead. When Mary's unclevisits the house briefly for the firsttime since she arrived, Maryasks him for a bit of earth to make aflower garden, and he agrees.Thanks to the effects of the Yorkshireair and her new interest inthe garden, Mary begins to blossom. Herlooks and personality bothimprove greatly.

One night Mary hears crying in the house. She asksabout it buteveryone denies the noises even happened. When herUncle next goesaway, she explores the house and finds her uncle'sson, Colin, alonely, bedridden boy as petulant and disagreeable asMary used tobe. His father cannot look at him because he looks somuch like hismother. Mr. Craven is a hunchback, and is convincedthat Colin willdevelop the same condition. This fear has beenpassed on to Colin,who has never learned to walk and believes hecannot. The servantshave been keeping Mary and Colin a secret fromone another becauseColin doesn't like strangers staring at him andthrows very badtantrums. However Colin takes to Mary and insists onher visitinghim frequently.

As the weather gets better, Mary spends more time outin thegarden with Dickon than indoors with Colin and he gets veryjealous.One day he voices his resentment and, when Mary resists, hethrows atantrum. To the surprise and amusement of the servants,Marycontinues to stand her ground. That evening, Colin has ahystericalfit, brought on by his fear of dying young. Mary goes tohim and,again taking a firm, no-nonsense stance with him and tocalm him downslaps him in the face and to the servants' surprise,when Mary startsscreaming at him, he doesn't object.

When he asks if he can visit the garden with her, sheagrees. Maryand Dickon had already been planning to take Colin tothe garden.Colin is delighted with the garden, and visits it withMary andDickon whenever the weather allows. Colin grows as did thegarden andMary too.

The children are discovered in the garden by the oldgardener, BenWeatherstaff, a favorite of Colin's mother. Since shedied, he hasbeen visiting the locked garden once or twice a year bysecretlyclimbing over the wall with a ladder. He is angry with thechildrenuntil he sees how much better both the garden and Colinlook. Colinorders him not to tell anybody, and he agrees. Colindecides to learnto walk like a normal child. HWith a combination ofexercise andpositive thinking he achieves his goal. He refuses tothink ofhimself as crippled any more. He keeps it hidden fromeveryone butMary, Dickon, and Ben.

Mary's Uncle has been travelling throughout Europebut returnshome early after seeing a vision of his dead wife,telling himurgently that she needs to see him in the garden. Hearrives whilethe children are outdoors. He goes out to see Colinfor himself, andfinds himself drawn to the secret garden, where heis first surprisedto hear children's voices and then to find Colinnot only racing Maryand Dickon around the garden, but winning. Theytake Mr. Craven intothe secret garden to tell him their story. TheUncle is very happy.



This classic tale has enchanted children and adultsalike ever since. It is a story so rich in meaning that although itis set in the past, it doesn't feel dated. It can be enjoyed asmuch now as it ever was when it was first released.



Frances Eliza Hodgson (alsoknown as Frances "Hopey" Benson) was born in Cheetham Hill,Manchester, England. After her father died in 1854, she was raisedby her mother along with her four siblings in the slums ofVictorian Manchester. It was a hard and impoverishedupbringing.

She immigrated to Knoxville, Tennessee in the UnitedStates in 1856 at the request of an uncle. When her mother died in1867, Frances was 18 years old and now the head of a family of twoyounger siblings. She turned to writing as a means of supportingthem. Her first story was published in Godey's Lady's Book in 1868.Soon after she was being published regularly in Godey's, Scribner's Monthly , Peterson's Ladies' Magazine and Harper's Bazaar. Shewas well known for writing working class romance stories.


In 1873 she married Dr. Swan Burnett of Washington,D.C..

Her first novel, That Lass o' Lowrie's, was publishedin 1877 and was a story of Lancashire life.

She moved to Washington DC with her husband and wenton to write more novels. Here she wrote the novels Haworth's (1879), Louisiana (1880), A Fair Barbarian (1881), and Through One Administration (1883), as wellas a play, Esmeralda (1881), written with William Gillette.

In 1886 she published Little Lord Fauntleroy. It wasoriginally intended as a children's book, but had a great appeal tomothers. It created a fashion of long curls (based on her sonVivian's) and velvet suits with lace collars (based on OscarWilde's attire). The book sold more than half a million copies. In1888 she won a lawsuit in England over the dramatic rights toLittle Lord Fauntleroy, establishing a precedent that wasincorporated into British copyrightlaw in 1911.

In 1898 she divorced Dr. Burnett. She re-married in1900, to her business manager Stephen Townsend, however thismarriage ended in 1902.

In 1893 she published a memoir of her youth, The One I Knew Best of All . From themid-1890s she lived mainly in England, and in particular at GreatMaytham Hall (from 1897 to 1907) where she really did discover asecret garden, but in 1909 she moved back to the United States,after having become a U.S. citizen in 1905.

Her later works include Sara Crewe (1888), laterrewritten as A Little Princess (1905); The Lady of Quality (1896), considered one of the best of her plays; and TheSecret Garden (1911), the children's novel for which she isprobably best known today. The Lost Prince was published in 1915,and The Head of the House ofCoombe was published in Canada in 1922. TheMaking of a Marchioness was published in 1911.



Frances Hodgson Burnett,became a practitioner of ChristianScience after the death of herson. It is due to this influencethat The Secret Garden covers theconcepts of NewThought and theosophyas well as ideas about thehealing powers of the mind.



The garden is the book's central symbol. The secretgarden atMisselthwaite Manor is the site of both thenear-destruction and thesubsequent regeneration of a family. Usingthe garden analogy,Burnett explores the healing power of livingthings.

Maytham Hall in Kent,England, where Burnett lived fora number of years during hermarriage to Stephen Townesend, is saidto be the inspiration for thebook's setting. Maytham Hall did havegardens.



FrancesHodgson Burnett, livedat Great Maytham Hall from 1898 to 1907,where she found the oldwalled garden dating from 1721 sadlyovergrown and neglected. Aidedby a robin, Burnett discovered thedoor hidden amongst the ivy, andbegan the restoration of the garden,which she planted with hundredsof roses. She set up a table andchair in the gazebo, and dressedalways in a white dress and largehat, she wrote a number of booksin the peace and tranquility of herscented secret garden.



The Secret Garden firstappeared to the public in serial formataimed at adults in 1910, oneyear before it was released as a book.Marketing to both adult andyounger audiences may have had an effecton its early reception; thebook was not as popular as B urnett'sprevious works during her lifetime.

The book was released in 1911 and featuredillustrations by the artist Troy Howell. It was published byChildrens Classics and is 272 pages long.


The Secret Garden paled in comparison to thepopularity ofBurnett's other works such as Little Lord Fauntleroyfor a longperiod. This important work isalso worthy of mention.



Little Lord Fauntleroy waspublished by Scribner's in 1886 and is set in the mid 1880s inBrooklyn, New York. Cedric Errol is a poor American boy from NewYork City. When his father dies, he discovers that he is the soleheir to a wealthy British earldom. Cedric becomes Lord Fauntleroy,who someday will be the next Earl of Dorincourt in England.

Cedric moves to England and joins his grandfather,the Earl, in Dorincourt Castle. His American mother lives close by,but is not allowed to visit the castle or see the Earl.

The old and selfish Earl is impressed by theappearance and intelligence of his young American grandson, andcharmed by him. He later states that Cedric, who has befriended andcared for the poor and needy around him, will be a better earl thanhe was.

The Earl of Dorincourt had intended to teach hisgrandson how to be an aristocrat. However, Cedric inadvertentlyteaches his grandfather that an aristocrat should practicecompassion and social justice towards persons who are dependent onhim.

A crisis shames the Earl into asking Cedric's motherto forgive him. With the help of Cedric's loyal American friends,the crisis is resolved.

Through Cedric's belief in his grandfather'sgoodness and through his good example, the old Earl becomes thekind and good man Cedric always believed him to be, and Cedric isreunited with his mother, who comes to live in the castle withCedric and the Earl.



With the rise of scholarlywork in children's literature over thepast quarter century, TheSecret Garden has steadily risen toprominence, and is now arguablyBurnett's best known work. The bookis often noted as one of thebest children's books of the twentiethcentury.



However, similaritiesbetween The Secret Garden and Wuthering Heights, written severalyears earlier have been noted.

Both Wuthering Heights and The Secret Garden takeplace in Yorkshire. While Bronte portrays that shire as a vast,mysterious, nearly mystical place, Burnett gives her own concept ofthe shires mystical aspects in brief descriptions related to MaryLennox by Mrs. Medlock and Martha and Dickon Sowerby. Both novelsincorporate elements of the supernatural, where the voice of thelost love (Catherine Earnshaw and Lilias Craven) of the adult maleprotagonist (Heathcliff and Archibald Craven) speaks to theliving.

For Burnett in The Secret Garden, the moors are aplace described but never experienced first-hand. Her centralcharacter, Mary Lennox, crosses the moors at night and never duringthe course of the story ventures out upon them again. The chiefreason for this may be that unlike Emily Bronte, Burnett had only alimited working knowledge of the Yorkshire moors. Instead, shecreates a safer environment for her child readers, surrounded bybut separate from the wilderness of the unknown moors. This was anenvironment with which she, herself, was familiar, an enclosedgarden, wild and overgrown but an oasis contained in a way that themoors are not. Significantly, Mary Lennox has the momentaryillusion of sailing on the sea as she drives across the moors inthe dark. This image of the moors as a vast, unpredictable oceanreinforces the subsequent image of the garden as an island ofrefuge not only from the unpredictability of the outside naturalworld but from the unpredictability of adult human emotions whichin both books are mirrored in natural events.

Although she differedfrom Bronte by refashioning herexterior setting, Burnett kept untouched the mouldy mystery of hernovel interiors, a gloomy old house haunted by the passions of thepast. Yet Burnetts great, gloomy pile of Misselthwaite Manor seemsto owe more to Charlotte Brone tand Jane Eyre's Thornfield Hallthan to either the ancient farmhouse of Wuthering Heights or themore affluent manor of Thrushcross Grange. Certainly the plotdevice common to both books, that of the young female strangerhearing wild human sounds behind locked doors and thick walls inforbidden parts of the house, seem closely related. But if Burnettappears to have borrowed from Charlotte Bronte the pattern for theancient house in which she set her story, it was Emily Bronte'swork which appears to have had the greater influence on Burnettcharacters and principal points of her story.

For The Secret Garden, Burnett created a cast ofcharacters, each of which appears influenced by one or more of thecharacters in Wuthering Heights. Both books begin with the arrivalof a child into, what is for them, the alien environment ofYorkshire. There are similarities as well as differences betweenthese two children Mary Lennox and Heathcliff. Like Heathcliff,Mary is a mody orphan. She was, according to Burnett, t he mostdisagreeable-looking child ever seen . . . [with] a sour expression. . . [and] as tyrannical and selfish a little pig as ever lived.Burnett makes the orphaned Mary at nine years old roughly the sameage as the orphaned Heathcliff when he first arrives at WutheringHeights. She comes to Yorkshire as an outsider ,an English childraised in India, home of the gypsies, as foreign to Yorkshire as isthe gypsy boy Heathcliff. Both speak words the locals cannotunderstand. Heathcliff, Romany and Mary, Hindilthough Mary has theadvantage of speaking English as well. Just as it is the appearanceon the scene of the self-willed Heathcliff with his ungovernablepassions which initiates the action in Wuthering Heights, so it isthe appearance of the self-willed Mary Lennox and her equallyuncontrolled nature which precipitates the action in The SecretGarden. Yet the two authors take their protagonists in differentdirections. Heathcliff grows from a surly, violent boy into asurly, violent man. Mary, like the garden which comes to obsessher, metamorphoses into a civilized, sympathetic human being with aconcern for the opinions and welfare of others. She sheds heroriginal selfish egocentrism as the garden sheds its weeds beneathher hand. Unlike Heathcliff, who mirrors the destructive aspects ofnature, Mary, within the context of the garden, comes to embody theconstructive aspects which nurture life.

Mary uncle, Archibald Craven, tall, dark, morose andbrooding, is prey to the same passions as the adult Heathcliff.Although shorn of Heathcliff deliberate malice, Craven is stillpossessed of a soul-destroying obsession centered on his lost wife.This obsession brings destruction and despair to himself and tothose around him. Burnett describes Craven as a man who oisoned theair about him with gloom. Most strangers thought he must be eitherhalf mad or a man with some hidden crime on his soul. He certainlyseems Heathcliff soulmate. Craven lost beloved and permanentfixation is his beautiful deceased wife, Lilias. Gravely hurt whena tree branch breaks under her, she, like Heathcliff Cathy,subsequently dies in childbirth. Craven blames the loss of his wifeboth on the garden where the accident occurred and, again likeHeathcliff, on the child whose premature birth hastened heruntimely death. Craven takes his revenge by locking up the garden,confining the boy at Misselthwaite and then abandoning both.Heathcliff revenge includes the confinement of his own son, Linton,and of Cathy daughter, Catherine Linton, at Wuthering Heights.

Mary Lennox is for Burnett both the chiefprotagonist in The Secret Garden and the catalyst which begins theaction. In the early chapters, as a catalyst, she stands inrelationship to her own story where Heathcliff stands inrelationship to his. Yet there are marked differences between them.Heathcliff is introduced into an apparently happy family which heis instrumental in breaking apart. Mary is introduced into anunhappy family which she is instrumental in bringing together. Herrole as the story progresses seems increasingly to emulate the roleplayed by the young Catherine Linton in Wuthering Heights. This isnot as contradictory as it might appear given the dramaticalteration in Mary character within the context of the action. Thesame stubborn streak of sullen rebellion which pits the will ofHeathcliff against that of Catherine Linton in the second half ofWuthering Heights is reflected in the sullen streak of stubbornnessthat is part of the character of Mary Lennox. Yet Mary later learnsto use this stubbornness to good purpose in her dealings with hercousin Colin, just as Catherine stubborn animosity towardHeathcliff leads her to initiate a relationship with her cousinHareton which proves to be the salvation of them both. Othersimilarities exist between Mary and Catherine. Both are stronglyattracted to ature boys,rough illiterates at home on the moors.Both boys are shown to be superior in character to the two malecousins of the girlsown class. Dickon, the boy from the moors, whoplays a pipe like Pan and charms animals, fits the structure of TheSecret Garden like a minor woodland god. He seems to be Burnettversion of Hareton Earnshaw, the cousin who marries CatherineLinton after Heathcliff death. Hareton like Dickon is a man of thesoil and is good with animals. Dickon character in The SecretGarden is the one most in touch with the Divine, and seems to takeits cues from Bront Hareton, whose own deep-rootedness in theYorkshire moors is the natural balm that, despite circumstance,keeps him whole.

The third characters in these younger generationaltriads within the two stories are Linton Heathcliff and ColinCraven. They appear to grow from the same rootstock created byBronte but in The Secret Garden, Colin life moves toward adifferent resolution. Colin lives and flourishes while Lintonwithers and dies. Yet both are introduced by Brontand Burnett innearly identical terms.



The Secret Garden has beenadapted many timesfor other media.

The first filmed version was made in 1919 by theFamousPlayers-Lasky Corporation with 17 year old LilaLee as Maryand PaulWillis as Dickon, but the film is now lost.

In 1949, MGMfilmed thesecond adaptation withMargaretO'Brien. This version was mostly in black-and-white, butthesequences set in the restored garden were filmed inTechnicolor.

The most acclaimed film adaptation isAmericanZoetrope's 1993production. It was directed byAgnieszkaHolland and starred KateMaberly as Mary, HeydonProwse asColin, AndrewKnott as Dickon and DameMaggie Smith as Mrs.Medlock.

DorotheaBrooking adapted thebook into several different televisionserials for the BBC: aneight-part serial in 1952, a six-part serialin 1960 (starringColinSpaull as Dickon), and a three-part serial in 1975.

In 1987, HallmarkHall of Fame filmed a TV adaptationof the novel starring GennieJames as Mary, BarretOliver as Dickon,and JadrienSteele as Colin. DerekJacobi plays the role of ArchibaldCraven, with AlisonDoody appearing in flashbacks and visions asLilias; a youngColinFirth also makes an appearance as the adultColin Craven.



In 2000, a sequel movie calledReturn to the Secret Garden was made. It was directed by ScottFeatherstone and won the Director's Gold Award at the 2001 SantaClarita International Film Festival. In 2001, Back to the SecretGarden starring Camilla Belle as the American orphan, Lizzie, wasdirected by Michael Tuchner. It is set when Mary and Colin havemarried and turned the Craven Manor into a shelter for orphans.

An unofficial sequel novel about the adult lives ofMary, Colin, and Dickon was written by Susan Moody in 1995 andpublished under two different titles: Misselthwaite: The Sequel tothe Secret Garden and Return to the Secret Garden. The New YorkTimes also published a brief parodic sequel in the same year.

In 1991, a Japanese animated version of The SecretGarden was made. Another anime movie, Sōkō no Strain (2006), basedon another of Frances Hodgson Burnett's novels A Little Princess,draws some elements from The Secret Garden, most notably the namesof Colin, Mary, Martha and Dickon.



This animated storyrevolvesd around a 28-year old female magazine editor who is tiredof work and feels she doesn't have a life is assigned to be incharge of a very popular cartoonist with a most lovely name, YurikoHanazono. But as she goes to Hanazono's residence/office, she ismet by four men who seem to be her assistants. Then it turns outthose four men are brothers who form a team named Yuriko Hanazonoby taking roles to create popular comics. In this heartwarmingcomedy, the exhausted editor may find out the key to being happywhile she is being driven crazy by this unique gang of brothers. Soas you can see it doesn't bear a great resemblance to the originalstory!



Noel Streatfeild's novel ThePainted Garden (U.S. title Movie Shoes) has as its central storythe filming of The Secret Garden in Hollywood.



Act I Opening Lily, Company There's a Girl Company The House Upon the Hill Company I Heard Someone Crying Lily, Mary. Archibald A Fine White Horse Martha A Girl in the Valley Archibald, Lily It's a Maze Mary, Ben, Dickon, Martha Winter's on the Wing Dickon Show Me the Key Mary, Dickon A Bit of Earth Archibald, Mary Storm I Company Lily's Eyes Archibald, Neville Storm II Mary, Company Round-Shouldered Man Colin Final Storm Mary, Company Act II The Girl I Mean to Be Mary Quartet Archibald, Lily, Neville, Rose Race You to the Top of the Morning Archibald Wick Mary, Dickon Come to My Garden Lily Lift Me Up Colin Come Spirit, Come Charm Mary, Dickon, Martha, Lily,Company A Bit of Earth (Reprise) Lily, Rose, Albert Disappear Neville Hold On Martha Letter Song Archibald, Mary, Martha Where in the World Archibald How Could I Ever Know Archibald, Lily Finale Company The casts:

Original Broadway Cast Mary Lennox - Daisy Eagan Archibald Craven - Mandy Patinkin Lily Craven - Rebecca Luker Neville Craven - Robert Westenberg Martha - Alison Fraser Dickon - John Cameron Mitchell Colin - John Babcock Australian Cast Mary Lennox - Samantha Fiddes , Sarah Ogden Archibald Craven - Anthony Warlow Lily - Marina Prior Neville Craven - Philip Quast Dickon - Tom Blair Martha - Susan-Ann Walker Colin Craven - Bart Ritchie , RossHannaford Ben - Raymond Duprac Mrs. Medlock - June Salter London C Mary Lennox Natalie Morgan Colin Luke Newberry Archibald Craven - Philip Quast Neville Craven - Peter Polycarpou ( On the cast recording, thisrole was sung by Christian Patterson) Lily Meredith Braun Martha - Linzi Hateley Dickon Craig Purnell 2005 World AIDS Day Benefit "Dream" Cast

Directed by Stafford Arima. Produced by JamieMcGonnigal. Music directed by original music director Michael Kosarin . Mary Lennox - Jaclyn Neidenthal Archibald Craven - Steven Pasquale Lily - Laura Benanti Neville Craven - Will Chase Albert - Max von Essen Dickon - Michael Arden Martha - Celia Keenan-Bolger Colin Craven - Struan Erlenborn Ben - David Canary Claire - Jenny Powers Alice - Deborah S. Craig Lt. Wright - Matt Cavenaugh Mrs. Medlock - Barbara Rosenblat The Ayah - Reshma Shetty The Fakir - Nehal Joshi Rose - Sara Gettelfinger



Other stage adaptations of thebook have also been created.

In 2007 the Orlando Shakespeare Theater commissionedApril-Dawn Gladu to create an adaptation for their Theater ForYoung Audiences series. This version's unique qualities include anactress silently playing The Garden Tree, which was the tree thatLilias fell from years ago. As the children work secretly in thegarden to bring it to life, the living tree wakes up, flourishesand blooms.

Oakland Ballet has produced The Secret Garden set tomusic by Sir Edward Elgar.

The Secret Garden has also been made into an opera byClover Loehr & Conan McLemore, and will be presented byNorthwest Children's Opera in June of 2009.

