The president's of the United States is one of the most powerful offices of its kind in the world. The president, the Constitution says, must "take care that the laws be faithfully executed." To carry out this responsibility, the president presides over the executive branch of the federal government - a vast organization numbering about 4 million people, including 1 million active-duty military personnel. In addition, the president has important legislative and judicial powers.



The President of the United States is the head of state and head of government of the United States of America and is the highest political official in the United States by influence and recognition. The President leads the executive branch of the federal government; his role is to execute the law as created by the Congress, in accordance with the Constitution of the United States. Article II of the Constitution establishes the President as commander-in-chief of the armed forces and enumerates powers specifically granted to the President, including the power to sign into law or veto bills passed by both houses of the Congress. The President also has the power to create a cabinet of advisers and to grant pardons or reprieves. Finally, with the "advice and consent" of the Senate, the President is empowered to make treaties and appoint federal officers, ambassadors and federal judges, including Justices of the Supreme Court. As with officials in the other branches of the United States government, the Constitution restrains the President with a set of checks and balances designed to prevent any individual or group from taking absolute power.



The primary duty of the president of the United States is to make sure that all U.S. laws are carried out and that the federal government is run effectively. Although the president may not introduce new legislation - that's the duty of Congress - he does wield veto power over all bills that are approved by the legislature. In addition, the president has the weighty role of commander in chief of the armed forces.

As the nation's chief executive, the president oversees foreign policy, making treaties with foreign nations and appointing ambassadors to other nations and to the United Nations. He also appoints members of the Cabinet, as well as Supreme Court justices and federal judges.

Day-To-Day Governance
The president, with Senate approval, appoints a Cabinet, which oversees specific facets of government. Members of the Cabinet include - but are not limited to - the vice president, the presidential chief of staff, the U.S trade representative, and the heads of all the major federal departments, such as the secretaries of state, defense, the Treasury and the attorney general, who leads the Justice Department. The president, along with his Cabinet, helps set the tone and policy for the entire executive branch and how the laws of the United States are enforced.

Legislative Duties
The president is expected to address the full Congress at least once a year to report on the State of the Union. Although the president does not have the power to enact laws, he does work with Congress to introduce new legislation and carries a great deal of power, particularly with members of his own party, to lobby for legislation he favors. If Congress should enact a law that the president opposes, he may veto the legislation before it can become law. Congress may override the presidential veto with a two-thirds majority of those in attendance in both the Senate and House of Representatives at the time the override vote is taken.

Foreign Policy
The president is authorized to make treaties with foreign nations, pending Senate approval. He also appoints ambassadors to other countries and to the United Nations, though those, too, require Senate confirmation. The president and his administration represent the interests of the United States abroad; as such, he often meets with, entertains and develops a relationship with other heads of state.

Commander in Chief
The president serves as commander in chief of the nation's armed forces. In addition to his powers over the military, the president has the authority to deploy those forces at his discretion, with congressional approval. He may also ask Congress to declare war on other nations.

Salary and Perks
Being president is not without its perks. The president earns $400,000 per year and is, traditionally, the highest-paid federal official. He has use of two presidential residences, the White House and Camp David in Maryland; has both an airplane, Air Force One, and helicopter, Marine One, at his disposal; and has a legion of staff members including a personal chef to assist him in both his professional duties and private life.

Risky Job
The job is certainly not without its risks. The president and his family are given round-the-clock protection by the Secret Service. Abraham Lincoln was the first U.S. president to be assassinated; James Garfield, William McKinley and John F. Kennedy were also assassinated while in office. Andrew Jackson, Harry Truman, Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan all survived assassination attempts. Presidents continue to receive Secret Service protection after they retire from office.


Requirements to hold office

Section One of Article II of the U.S. Constitution establishes the requirements one must meet in order to become President. The president must be a natural-born citizen of the United States (or a citizen of the United States at the time the U.S. Constitution was adopted), be at least 35 years of age, and have been a resident of the United States for 14 years.

The natural-born citizenship requirement has been the subject of some controversy in recent years. Some commentators argue that the clause should be repealed because it excludes qualified people based on technicalities, and fails to appreciate the contributions made by immigrants to American society. Prominent public officials that are barred from the presidency because they were not born US citizens include California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, and Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm.

Under the Constitution, the President serves a four-year term. Amendment XXII (which took effect in 1951 and was first applied to Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952) limits the President to either two four-year terms or a maximum of ten years in office should he have succeeded to the Presidency previously and served less than two years completing his predecessor's term.


Electoral College

Voters in each of the states elect the President on Election Day, set by law as the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, once every four years. Each state holds a number of electoral votes that correspond to electors in the Electoral College. Tickets of presidential and vice presidential candidates are shown on the ballot; each vote for a ticket actually corresponds to a vote for a slate of electors chosen by that tickets political party. In most states, the ticket that wins the most votes in a state wins all of that state's electoral votes and thus has its slate of electors chosen to vote in the Electoral College. Maine and Nebraska do not use this method, opting instead to give two electoral votes to the statewide winner and one electoral vote to the winner of each Congressional district. Neither state had split electoral votes between candidates as a result of this system in modern elections until 2008, when Barack Obama received one electoral vote by winning Nebraska's 2nd congressional district. In any case, the winning slate of electors meet at its state's capital on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December, a few weeks after the election, to vote and sends a vote count to Congress.

The President is elected by the people indirectly through the Electoral College to a four-year term, with a limit of two terms imposed by the Twenty-second Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1951. Under this system, each state is allocated a number of electoral votes equal to the size of the state's combined delegation in both houses of the Congress. The District of Columbia is also granted electoral votes, per the Twenty-third Amendment to the Constitution. Voters in nearly all states choose, through a plurality voting system, a presidential candidate who receives all of that state's electoral votes. An absolute majority of electoral votes is needed to become President; if no candidate receives a majority, the choice is given to the House of Representatives, which votes by state delegation.

The vote count is opened by the sitting Vice President, acting in his capacity as President of the Senate and read aloud to a joint session of the incoming Congress, which was elected at the same time as the President. Members of Congress can object to any state's vote count, provided that the objection is supported by at least one member of each house of Congress. A successful objection will be followed by debate; however, objections to the electoral vote count are rarely raised.

In the event that no candidate receives a majority of the electoral vote, the House of Representatives chooses the President from among the top three contenders. However, the House does not vote normally; instead, each state delegation is given only one vote, marginalizing the importance of more populous states. The Vice President is chosen through normal voting in the Senate, where each state delegation is already of equal size. Privileges of office

The White House in Washington, D.C. serves as the official place of residence for the President; he (or she) is entitled to use its staff and facilities, including medical care, recreation, housekeeping, and security services. One of two Boeing VC-25 aircraft, which are extensively modified versions of Boeing 747-200B airliners, serve as long distance travel for the President, and are referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board. A salary of $400,000, along with other benefits, is paid to the President annually.

The president also uses a United States Marine Corps helicopter, designated Marine One when the president is aboard. Similarly, "Navy One", "Army One", and "Coast Guard One" are the call signs used if the president is aboard a craft belonging to these services. For ground travel, the president uses an armored presidential limousine, built on a heavily modified Cadillac-based chassis.

Salary

The First U.S. Congress voted to pay George Washington a salary of $25,000 a year, about $566,000 in 2008 terms. Washington, already a wealthy man, refused to accept his salary; however, he asked for his living expenses to be covered. Theodore Roosevelt spent his entire $50,000 salary on entertaining guests at the White House. John F. Kennedy donated his salary to charities. Date established Salary Salary in 2008

dollars September 24, 1789 $25,000 $566,000 March 3, 1873 $50,000 $865,000 March 4, 1909 $75,000 $1,714,000 January 19, 1949 $100,000 $875,000 January 20, 1969 $200,000 $1,135,000 January 20, 2001 $400,000 $471,000

Traditionally, the President is the highest-paid public employee. President Obama currently earns $400,000 per year, along with a $50,000 expense account, a $100,000 nontaxable travel account and $19,000 for entertainment. The most recent raise in salary was approved by Congress and President Bill Clinton in 1999 and went into effect in 2001; prior to the change, the President earned $200,000, plus expense accounts.

Before passage by Congress of the Former Presidents Act (FPA) in 1958, retired Presidents did not receive a pension. All living Presidents in 1959 began to receive a pension of $25,000 per year, an office and a staff. The pension has increased numerous times with Congressional approval. Retired Presidents now receive a pension based on the salary of the current administration's cabinet secretaries (Executive Level I), which is $191,300 as of 2008.[22] Some former Presidents have also collected congressional pensions.The FPA, as amended, also provides former presidents with travel funds and mailing privileges.


Barack Hussein Obama II (pronounced /b r k h se n o b m /; born August 4, 1961) is the 44th and current President of the United States. He is the first African American to hold the office. Obama was the junior United States Senator from Illinois from 2005 until he resigned following his election to the presidency. He was inaugurated as President on January 20, 2009.

Obama is a graduate of Columbia University and Harvard Law School, where he was the first African American president of the Harvard Law Review. He worked as a community organizer in Chicago prior to earning his law degree, and practiced as a civil rights attorney in Chicago before serving three terms in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004. He also taught Constitutional Law at the University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004. Following an unsuccessful bid for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives in 2000, Obama was elected to the Senate in November 2004. Obama delivered the keynote address at the Democratic National Convention in July 2004. 2008 Presidential campaign

On February 10, 2007, Obama announced his candidacy for President of the United States in front of the Old State Capitol building in Springfield, Illinois.The choice of the announcement site was symbolic because it was also where Abraham Lincoln delivered his historic "House Divided" speech in 1858. Throughout the campaign, Obama emphasized the issues of rapidly ending the Iraq War, increasing energy independence and providing universal health care.

During both the primary process and the general election, Obama's campaign set numerous fundraising records, particularly in the quantity of small donations.On June 19, 2008, Obama became the first major-party presidential candidate to turn down public financing in the general election since the system was created in 1976.

A large number of candidates initially entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries. After a few initial contests, the field narrowed to a contest between Obama and Senator Hillary Clinton, with each winning some states and the race remaining close throughout the primary process. On May 31, the Democratic National Committee agreed to seat all of the disputed Michigan and Florida delegates at the national convention, each with a half-vote, narrowing Obama's delegate lead. On June 3, with all states counted, Obama passed the threshold to become the presumptive nominee. On that day, he gave a victory speech in St. Paul, Minnesota. Clinton suspended her campaign and endorsed him on June 7.From that point on, he campaigned for the general election race against Senator John McCain, the Republican nominee.

On August 23, 2008, Obama announced that he had selected Delaware Senator Joe Biden as his vice presidential running mate.

At the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado, Obama's former rival Hillary Clinton gave a speech in support of Obama's candidacy and later called for Obama to be nominated by acclamation as the Democratic presidential candidate.On August 28, Obama delivered a speech to 84,000 supporters in Denver. During the speech, which was viewed by over 38 million people worldwide, he accepted his party's nomination and presented his policy goals.

After McCain was nominated as the Republican presidential candidate, there were three presidential debates between Obama and McCain in September and October 2008. In November, Obama won the presidency with 53% of the popular vote and a wide electoral vote margin. His election sparked street celebrations in numerous cities in the United States and abroad.

Election victory

On November 4, 2008, Barack Obama defeated John McCain in the general election with 365 electoral votes to McCain's 173 and became the first African American to be elected President of the United States.In his victory speech, delivered before a crowd of hundreds of thousands of his supporters in Chicago's Grant Park, Obama proclaimed that "change has come to America." On January 8, 2009, a joint session of the U.S. Congress certified the Electoral College votes, officially declaring that Obama was elected President.

Presidency

The inauguration of Barack Obama as the forty-fourth President, and Joe Biden as Vice President, took place on January 20, 2009. The theme of the inauguration was "A New Birth of Freedom," commemorating the 200th anniversary of the birth of Abraham Lincoln.

In his first few days in office, Obama issued executive orders and presidential memoranda reversing President Bush's ban on federal funding to foreign establishments that allow abortions (known as the Mexico City Policy and referred by critics as the "Global Gag Rule"), changed procedures to promote disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, directed the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from Iraq, and reduced the secrecy given to presidential records. He also issued orders closing Guantanamo Bay detention camp "as soon as practicable and no later than" January 2010.

Political positions

A method that some political scientists use for gauging ideology is to compare the annual ratings by the Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) with the ratings by the American Conservative Union (ACU). Based on his years in Congress, Obama has a lifetime average conservative rating of 7.67% from the ACU, and a lifetime average liberal rating of 90% from the ADA.

Obama was an early opponent of the Bush administration's policies on Iraq. On October 2, 2002, the day President George W. Bush and Congress agreed on the joint resolution authorizing the Iraq War, Obama addressed the first high-profile Chicago anti-Iraq War rally in Federal Plaza, speaking out against the war. On March 16, 2003, the day Bush issued his 48-hour ultimatum to Saddam Hussein to leave Iraq before the U.S. invasion of Iraq, Obama addressed the largest Chicago anti-Iraq War rally to date in Daley Plaza and told the crowd that "it's not too late" to stop the war.Although Obama had previously said he wanted all the U.S. troops out of Iraq within 16 months of becoming President, after he won the primary, he said he might refine plans as further developments unfold.

Obama stated that if elected he would enact budget cuts in the range of tens of billions of dollars, stop investing in "unproven" missile defense systems, not weaponize space, "slow development of Future Combat Systems," and work towards eliminating all nuclear weapons. Obama favors ending development of new nuclear weapons, reducing the current U.S. nuclear stockpile, enacting a global ban on production of fissile material, and seeking negotiations with Russia in order to make it less necessary to have ICBMs on high-alert status.

In November 2006, Obama called for a "phased redeployment of U.S. troops from Iraq" and an opening of diplomatic dialogue with Syria and Iran.In a March 2007 speech to AIPAC, a pro-Israel lobby, he said that the primary way to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons is through talks and diplomacy, although he did not rule out military action.Obama has indicated that he would engage in "direct presidential diplomacy" with Iran without preconditions. Detailing his strategy for fighting global terrorism in August 2007, Obama said "it was a terrible mistake to fail to act" against a 2005 meeting of al-Qaeda leaders that U.S. intelligence had confirmed to be taking place in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas. He said that as president he would not miss a similar opportunity, even without the support of the Pakistani government.

In a December 2005, Washington Post opinion column, and at the Save Darfur rally in April 2006, Obama called for more assertive action to oppose genocide in the Darfur region of Sudan. He has divested $180,000 in personal holdings of Sudan-related stock, and has urged divestment from companies doing business in Iran. In the July August 2007 issue of Foreign Affairs, Obama called for an outward looking post-Iraq War foreign policy and the renewal of American military, diplomatic, and moral leadership in the world. Saying that "we can neither retreat from the world nor try to bully it into submission," he called on Americans to "lead the world, by deed and by example."

In economic affairs, in April 2005, he defended the New Deal social welfare policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt and opposed Republican proposals to establish private accounts for Social Security. In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, Obama spoke out against government indifference to growing economic class divisions, calling on both political parties to take action to restore the social safety net for the poor.Shortly before announcing his presidential campaign, Obama said he supports universal health care in the United States. Obama proposes to reward teachers for performance from traditional merit pay systems, assuring unions that changes would be pursued through the collective bargaining process.

In September 2007, he blamed special interests for distorting the U.S. tax code.His plan would eliminate taxes for senior citizens with incomes of less than $50,000 a year, repeal income tax cuts for those making over $250,000 as well as the capital gains and dividends tax cut,close corporate tax loopholes, lift the income cap on Social Security taxes, restrict offshore tax havens, and simplify filing of income tax returns by pre-filling wage and bank information already collected by the IRS.Announcing his presidential campaign's energy plan in October 2007, Obama proposed a cap and trade auction system to restrict carbon emissions and a ten year program of investments in new energy sources to reduce U.S. dependence on imported oil. Obama proposed that all pollution credits must be auctioned, with no grandfathering of credits for oil and gas companies, and the spending of the revenue obtained on energy development and economic transition costs.


FORMER Presidents of the United States

GEORGE WASHINGTON 1789-1797. Elected twice.

In 1776, Congress took the final step toward declaring the colonies free and independent states by writing the Declaration of Independence . In the same year the colonies declared themselves independent, drafting for The Articles of Confederation began.

Washington helped to shape America in three important ways. First, General Washington commanded the armed forces seeking to win the independence of the 13 colonies from Great Britain during the Revolutionary War.

Second, Washington was President of the Constitutional Convention . The Constitutional Convention was composed primarily of Federalists. They wrote and signed the US Constitution to replace the Articles of Confederation. John Hanson served as the first President of the United States under the Articles of Confederation.

Third, in 1789, the same year the Constitution went into effect, Washington was elected the first President of the United States under the US Constitution . Also in 1789, the Bill of Rights was written by James Madison and proposed in Congress. The ten amendments of Bill of Rights were not ratified until two tears later.


JOHN ADAMS 1797-1801.


Vice President under President Washington for two terms. Elected once. Defeated by Thomas Jefferson in attempt at reelection.

Adams was the first Vice President of the United States under the Constitution, and the second President of the United States under the Federalists party. The US government moved its headquarters from Philadelphia to Washington, DC during Adams administration. Adams was the first President to live in the White House.

Adams signed the Declaration of Independence. Adams also appointed John Marshall to Chief Justice of the United States .


THOMAS JEFFERSON 1801-1809 . Elected twice.

Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence in 1776. The election of Thomas Jefferson is significant because it was the first peaceful transfer of power between two different political parties. John Adams was a Federalist, and the newly elected Jefferson was a Democratic-Republican . Under Jefferson's administration, in the Civil Case of Marbury v Madison, Chief Justice John Marshall declared the power of judicial review over acts of Congress.

JAMES MADISON 1809-1817. Elected twice.

Father of the Constitution

Madison was originally a member of the Federalist Party and supported many of George Washington's policies. In time, he gradually came to oppose the financial plans of Washington's Secretary of Treasury, Alexander Hamilton. As a result, Madison turned against the Federalist Party and with Jefferson formed the Democratic-Republican Party.

James Madison wrote the U.S. Constitution, the Federalist Papers, and the Bill of Rights.

Madison wrote the US Constitution to replace the Articles of Confederation.

The Federalist Papers were written between 1776 and 1789 to advertise the US Constitution. Alexander Hamilton and John Jay assisted Madison in writing the papers.


Because the US Constitution still faced opposition, Madison promised to write the Bill of Rights. The Bill of Rights was written in 1789, two years later it was ratified and became the first ten amendments to the Constitution.

Madison helped design the checks and balances that operate among legislative, the executive, and the judicial branches of the government. He also helped create the US federal system, which divides power between the central government and the states. Madison was reelected president by the narrowest margin of any election since the Democratic-Republican Party had come to power.

Madison was Secretary of State when William Marbury sued him to force delivery of his appointment as justice of the peace. However, President Jefferson had ordered Madison not to make the appointment. Chief Justice John Marshall denied Marbury request for appointment, saying that Marbury had the right to his commission, but not to bring an original action in the Supreme Court.
ANDREW JACKSON (D) 1829-1837. Elected twice.

In 1789, The US Constitution went into effect although it faced opposition by the Democratic-Republican Party. In the election that occurred about 40 years after the Constitution went into effect, the Democratic-Republican Party evolved into the Democratic Party of today under the leadership of Andrew Jackson . This change was due to strong differences in opinion between Andrew Jackson and supporters of Thomas Jefferson.

Mainly farmers and other working people supported the Democratic Party. To allow farmers and other working people to help Jackson be elected, Jackson established the state convention to bypass the caucus system. Hostile eastern bankers had dominated the caucus system and had prevented Jackson from taking office because he was a Western farmer.

ABRAHAM LINCOLN 1861-1865. Elected twice. Did not complete his second term. When President Lincoln was assassinated, his Vice President Andrew Johnson took office.

Lincoln became the first Republican president of the Unites States . During the Civil War, Lincoln was the incumbent president of the United States. President Lincoln was assassinated in 1865, and incumbent vice president, Andrew Johnson, took over the presidency. 1865 was the same year the Civil War ended. The Civil War was fought over the issue of the southern states wishing to secede (leave) from the Union. Eleven southern states tried to secede from the Union. The Union was lead by Lincoln.

Under Lincoln , the Emancipation Proclamation became effective. The Emancipation Proclamation freed slaves who were living in Confederate states that were fighting against the Union. African-Americans were grateful to the Republican Party for the Emancipation Proclamation and for decades they voted in huge numbers for Republican candidates. The South responded to the Emancipation Proclamation with Jim Crow laws that require segregation. Lincoln was elected president for two terms. Lincoln delivered the Gettysburg Address. When President Lincoln was assassinated, his vice-president, Andrew Johnson, became President of the United States.

ANDREW JOHNSON 1865-1869 . Vice President under President Lincoln. When President Lincoln was assassinated, Johnson took office; he was impeached and acquitted.

After President Lincoln assassination, Andrew Johnson became President of the United States. President Andrew Johnson was impeached by the House of Representatives and tried before the Senate with the Supreme Court Chief Justice presiding . Because Andrew Johnson was acquitted by one vote, he remained in office. Andrew Johnson was the first president to be impeached.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT 1901-1909 . Vice president under President McKinley . When McKinley was assassinated, T. Roosevelt took office. Won election as a member of the Republican Party. Did not seek reelection. "Square Deal"/ New Nationalism: Policy of the Progressive Party

President Roosevelt led supporters into his Bull Moose Party, another name for the Progressive Party . The Party's platform called for numerous social and political reforms, including the conservation of natural and human resources, women's suffrage, popular election of US Senators and the initiative, referendum and recall. President Taft, formerly Roosevelt Vice President, did not continue with the policies Roosevelt had implemented. As a result, Roosevelt decided to run for reelection under the Progressive Party against Taft. Roosevelt was unsuccessful to his attempt at reelection because the Republican Party was divided.

WILLIAM H. TAFT 1909-1913 . Elected for once, lost reelection to W. Wilson.

Chosen to carry on the policies of President Roosevelt .

Angered over what he felt was the betrayal of his policies, former President Roosevelt sought the Republican nomination. The Republican Party chose Taft, rather than Roosevelt to run for election. Roosevelt formed the Progressive Party or Bull Moose Party and ran against Taft in an attempt at reelection. If the Republican Party had not split, they would have won the Presidential Election.

WOODROW WILSON (D) 1913-1921 . Elected for twice.

"New Freedom": Antimonopoly policies and return to small-scale business.

Wilson won election because Roosevelt, running as a Progressive and Taft the nominee for the Republic Party, divided the Republican voters. During President Wilson's administration, American troops were sent to Europe, and the United States became involved in World War I, 1917. The Central Powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary and Turkey) fought the Allied Powers (Great Britain, France and Russia).

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 1933-1945. Elected four times. His Vice President Harry S. Truman took over presidency when he died in his office.


"New Deal"

The 1929 Stock Market Crash affected economies in every country around the world. Many jobs across America were lost. 1929 was the beginning of a period in history known as the Great Depression. President Roosevelt's nickname was FDR. FDR proposed the New Deal, a series of programs that attempted to fix the economic situation of the United States. The New Deal appealed to African-American voters resulting in a switch of their loyalty from the Republican Party to the Democratic Party. In the first presidential election after the 1929 Stock Market Crash, FDR, a Democrat, was elected president. FDR was the only American president ever to serve four terms. Today, there is a term limit on the number of times a president can serve in office (two terms).

FDR was president when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. The day after Japan attacked Pearl harbor, FDR asked Congress for a declaration of war against the Japanese government. This began American involvement in World War II. President FDR died just before the end of World War II and his vice president, Harry S. Truman became President. World War II ended in 1945 with the unconditional surrender of all Japanese forces in the Pacific. After WWII, America ended its policy of isolationism.

HARRY S. TRUMAN (D) 1945-1953 . Took office when President Roosevelt died. Elected for once. Lost reelection to Dwight D. Eisenhower..

"Fair Deal"

In 1945, FDR died, Hitler died by suicide, and Germany surrendered. Truman ordered atomic bombs to be dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan. Japan surrendered within a week after the bombs were dropped. World War II ended in 1945.

The Allies cooperated to form the United Nations Organization (UNO) in San Francisco (the headquarters of the UNO are now in New York City). UNO was established to ensure global peace and security. Within the UN are agencies such as the United Nations International Emergency Children's fund (UNICEF), which provides education and health care, nutrition and emergency aid; and the UNESCO (United Nations Educational Scientific, and Cultural Organization), a specialized agency to promote cooperation in these areas.

Due to the fear of spreading communism, the US began the policy of containment shortly after the end of WWII.

The Berlin airlift provided food and supplies to West Germany because it had no road access due to a Soviet blockade. The Allied airlift forced the Soviets to lift the Berlin blockade that was aimed at pressuring the Western powers out of the Soviet occupied areas.

After WWII, America abandoned the policy of "abstention from entangling alliances in peacetime," by joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) of democratic countries of Europe. NATO included Britain, France, Benelux, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Italy, Norway and Portugal. The alliance was a form of protection from communist threats. The Soviets responded to NATO by forming the Warsaw Pact (Warsaw Treaty Organization) which intended to guard countries where Soviet influence was present.

The Truman Doctrine (containment) was aimed to support free peoples who were resisting Soviet communism. At the time the Truman Doctrine was adopted, Great Britain requested help from the US to protect Greece and Turkey from communist aggression. Great Britain feared the domino theory, which states if one country falls into communism more will follow until all are affected. The US kept the Soviets from pursuing imperialistic interests by focusing on internal reconstruction through the Marshall Plan also known as the European Recovery Program. The Truman Doctrine and Marshall Plan were based on containment of the Soviet Union, Soviet Union satellites, and communist allies. The Cold War, was a period of ideological, economic and political hostility and competition between east and west from 1945 to 1989. The Cold War also resulted in creating a bipolar world in which nations were either allied with the US or the Soviet Union.

The government of Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek was so corrupt that US aid was ineffective. Chinese Communists under dictator Mao Tse-tung took over China, making it the People's Republic of China (PRC). Chiang fled to Formosa (Taiwan) where he became president of the Republic of China (ROC).

The Korean War was after WWII. Japan had withdrawn from Korea that was now divided by the 38th parallel. The 38th parallel divided Korea into the Democratic People's Republic (Communist North Korea) backed by the USSR, and the Republic of (South) Korea, backed by the US and the UN. South Korea had a weak army and needed help to defend itself. The UN with a great deal of assistance from the US struggled to push the North Koreans back across the 38th parallel . The UN and American troops were stationed at the DMZ (demilitarized zone).

DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER 1953-1961. Elected twice.

Dwight D. was known as Ike Eisenhower. President Eisenhower ended the Korean War, which had begun when Harry S. Truman was President

Since 1862, France controlled the provinces around Saigon, and by 1893 it dominated all of Indochina (Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea, or Cambodia). A group led by Ho Chi Minh formed the League for the Independence of Vietnam (Vietminh) to oust the French from Vietnam. In the Geneva Accord, France, Great Britain, Russia and China agreed to divide Vietnam along the 17th parallel. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam (pro communist), under Ho Chi Minh would be to the north (Vietcong), and the southern sector would belong to Emperor Bao Dai.

In the Soviet Union, marxist-leninist dictator Joseph Stalin died and was replaced by Nikita Krushchev. Soviets launched the satellite Sputnik. The US felt the need to improve education in an attempt to compete with Soviet technology. To improve educational programs, the US passed the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA).

In the Middle East, the US had to restrain Russian expansion into oil resources such as Iran, Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. Another source of conflict in the Middle East was due to Israel (former Palestine) constant friction with neighboring nations . Truman support of Israel caused feelings of resentment for the US among Israel Arab neighbors. This conflict added to national, ethnic and religious dissent in the Middle East. An example Arab dissent would be the movement of Palestinians in Jordan and Israel to form a Palestine Nation.

When Guatemala began importing Soviet weapons, the Eisenhower administration helped overthrow the Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman. Similarly, Fidel Castro overthrew Dictator Fulgencio Batista and began a revolution in Cuba. Eisenhower ended his term breaking diplomatic relations with Cuba.

JOHN F. KENNEDY 1961-1963 . Elected once. Defeated Richard Nixon, Vice President under Ike Eisenhower for two terms. JFK was assassinated, and Vice President LB Johnson , took office.

"New Frontier"

Kennedy was the first Catholic to be elected President of the United States. He is the only president in US history who was not a WASP (White Anglo-Saxon Protestant). He selected Lyndon B. Johnson as his vice-president.

Once there were signs of Soviet-friendly activity in Cuba, Kennedy assigned the CIA to train and equip anti-Castro exiles to attack and overthrow revolutionary dictator Fidel Castro. This secret army invaded the Bay of Pigs , but was unsuccessful. Kennedy then raised an economic blockade on Cuba. Castro strengthened his connections with the Soviet Union.

The Soviet Union loaded Cuba with nuclear technology. Kennedy demanded removal of the nuclear weapons, threatening force if necessary. The blockade on Cuba was lifted and both the US and Soviet Union opened direct communication in case of crisis. This event was called The Cuban Missile Crisis.

The Berlin Wall was built to separate east and west Germany. The wall was built to stop migration in and out of East Germany. With no obvious objection from the US, the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons.

President Kennedy also introduced Civil Rights legislation to Congress. President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas. Vice-president Lyndon B. Johnson became president.

LYNDON B. JOHNSON 1963-1969 . Completed President Kennedy's term. Won election once. Did not seek reelection.

"Great Society"

Johnson took the oath of office as President of the United States after President Kennedy assassination.

Johnson Great society policies introduced dozens of innovative and new grant programs with an urban focus. The Model Cities program was designed to help cities develop projects addressing a variety of economic and social problems. For the first time community based programs for feeding the poor, training the unemployed, and educating the children of low-income families were introduced.

Under Johnson administration, American combat troops were deployed in Vietnam. Johnson requested congress to pass the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution that authorizes the President o take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the US and to prevent further aggression. The involvement of American troops in Vietnam was protested throughout the United States. President Johnson did not seek reelection.

Presidential facts

Four U.S. Presidents have been assassinated while in office: Abraham Lincoln in 1865 by John Wilkes Booth James Garfield in 1881 by Charles J. Guiteau (Guiteau shot him but Garfield arguably died due to subsequent incorrect medical care) William McKinley in 1901 by Leon Czolgosz John F. Kennedy in 1963 by Lee Harvey Oswald although many theories posit additional gunmen. Four others died in office of natural causes: William Henry Harrison, died of pneumonia in 1841 Zachary Taylor, died of "acute indigestion" in 1850 Warren G. Harding, died of heart attack in 1923 Franklin Delano Roosevelt, died of cerebral hemorrhage in 1945 One President resigned from office: Richard Nixon in 1974 Two Presidents have been impeached, though neither was subsequently convicted: Andrew Johnson in 1868 Bill Clinton in 1998 Four Presidents have been elected without a plurality of popular votes: John Quincy Adams - trailed Andrew Jackson by 44,804 votes in the 1824 election Rutherford B. Hayes - trailed Samuel J. Tilden by 264,292 votes in the 1876 election Benjamin Harrison - trailed Grover Cleveland 95,713 votes in the 1888 election George W. Bush - trailed Al Gore by 540,520 votes in the 2000 election Two Presidents have been elected without a majority of electoral votes, and were chosen by the House of Representatives: Thomas Jefferson - finished with same number of electoral votes as Aaron Burr in the 1800 election John Quincy Adams - trailed Andrew Jackson by 15 electoral votes in the 1824 election Five Presidents were not elected at all, although with the exception of Gerald Ford all were elected Vice President: John Tyler - Assumed the Presidency on the death of William Henry Harrison, did not run in the 1844 election. Millard Fillmore - Succeeded Zachary Taylor, did not run in the 1852 election. Andrew Johnson - Succeeded Abraham Lincoln, did not run in the 1868 election. Chester A. Arthur - Succeeded James Garfield, did not run in the 1884 election. Gerald Ford - Appointed Vice President on the resignation of Spiro Agnew, sworn in after Nixon's resignation and defeated in the 1976 election by Jimmy Carter. While most presidents have been of English descent, there have been a few who came, at least in part, from a different European background: Dutch: Martin Van Buren, Theodore Roosevelt, and Franklin Roosevelt German: Herbert Hoover and Dwight Eisenhower Irish: William McKinley, John F. Kennedy, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton Kennedy was also America's first, and to date, only Catholic president.
