The Music Man

There's something very special about attending a live music show, especially when one's on holiday, and welcoming the opportunity to do something productive in a different way of doing things. I mean, you'd hardly sneak away from business to watch a Tuesday matinee normally, would you? That's why time-warpexperiences like these are so important.

Personally we (that's Rob and me) prefer a Saturday evening best (especially when we're on holiday). The theatergoers are dressed up to their nines, and we're ready for our supper afterwards because we're getting on in years. After the exuberance is over and we step outside into the street that seems like a foreign place for just a few minutes, we can retire to an unfamiliar hotel room and drift off to sleep with the surrealism continuing.

With us, the process often begins several weeks before. We need the best seats in the house but in the middle price range, and on the aisle for me (just in case). This means combing though all the options while there's still time to choose. The process is complicated because we both like the other one to have first choice. "Which show do you like best" and "You choose" become our signature tune around the breakfast table.

Back in November 2008 we found ourselves in Ardentown, Delaware near Philadelphia in the USA. In case you don't normally have an interest in such matter (but are curious on this occasion) I'll tell you a little more about the village of Ardentown first.

It is a small settlement with a total area of 0.2 square miles and founded in 1922 as an outgrowth of Arden itself. To understand it's unusual background better, it's is located) may be Google-Earthed at 39 48 33 N 75 29 1 W and 39.80917 N 75.48361 W (or 39.809112, -75.483715 as you prefer). When the last census was taken in the year 2000, officials counted 300 people living in 136 households (of which 82 were families residing in the immediate village).

Of those 136 households, one fifth had children under the age of 18 living with them, and half were married couples living together. The other were single females and "non-families". Half the total area was set aside as a green belt.


Given the preponderance of dramatis personae and an eco friendly environment, it's not unlikely that among the latter were counted lesbians, gays and same-sex-couples. However the nature of the American protestant beast ensured that these were not counted separately.
Fiordland Self-contained Cottages - there being no hotels allowed in this historic town. There were five cottages to choose from, and all set well apart from each other in a park like setting, as per the aerial photo below.



As it turned out we had quite a choice, and as usual we took quite some time to finally decide to make up our minds ...

The Garden was a studio cottage set right at the back of the garden, quiet and private. It had an ensuite bathroom, kitchen with a table and chairs, fridge, microwave, toaster, electric jug, large electric frypan, pot and hotplate, TV and small stereo. "Gosh no," Rob said. "You're a light sleeper. At worst I want my own bed. At best, I'll prefer my own bedroom." Farewell, dear Garden," I commented. You are consumed to outer darkness.

The Back with queen bed was not much better, although Rob said "at least it has a two seat sofa you could doss on". "I'm not working all day and night on Odesk," I retorted. "to spend my nights on a regency-stripe couch". "So bet i," I was told, "Where to now?'

To the honest, I had thought all along that the Front with queen bed and single bed was the obvious choice. The studio cottage even had an easy-going access ramp just in case my great-aunt Flossie chose to call. Moreover it was also graced by ensuite bathroom, kitchen with a table and chairs, fridge, microwave, toaster, electric jug, large electric frypan, pot and hotplate, TV and small stereo. And it even had one of those much-maligned two seat sofas too! There was a gas barbeque for us to use at night, and a table and chairs outside for relaxing outside afterwards.


The New Candlelight Theater I think I may have alluded to previously is set in the historic village of Ardentown, and just minutes from downtown Wilmington and a short drive from Philadelphia. There, it combines fine dining with superb musical theater entertainment. The brochure had convinced us.

Tickets (which include a delicious gourmet buffet, superb Broadway-caliber performances and superior service by the cast and crew cost a competitive $50.00 per seat for Wednesday, Thursday and Friday performances, with just $5.00 more on Saturdays and Sundays. That sounded good enough for us. True quality and value in a semi-rural environment suited both of us perfectly.

Rob and I had decided to join the packed lobby crowds for a truly spectacular candlelight dinner experience on Saturday after enjoying the magic of live entertainment. Our favorite seats were available, the show was the legendary The Music Man , and we were good to go!

It's worth mentioning that this was also the last night in the final run in the New Candlelight Theater 2008 Seaso n to Remember Series. Previous shows had featured a Con-Artist Salesman, Barbershop Quartet, and Pick-a-Little Ladies too. "I feel a sense of the historic here," I turned and said to Rob. "Stop making such a fuss," he said, not unsympathetically.

Tales of a Great Man

The original book The Music Man (which became a book and then a movie) was conceived, developed, written and published by Meredith Reiniger Willson, who was born at a very young age on May 18, 1902 in his parents' home in Mason City, Iowa. He was a gifted lad (although his writing skills developed later) and he even learned to play the flute as a child - and began playing semi-professionally while still in high school - in days when this was hardly a suitable occupation for a growing lad in baseball-mad Iowa. Meredith, however was not deterred.

After graduating from Mason City High School, the young man left Iowa to study at the Damrosch Institute of Musical Art (later the Julliard School). The School's visionary founders had been distressed that so many talented young American musicians going off to study musically in Europe because local facilities did not exist. These days, many of those who still go to Europe to so because they are no longer America's best.

There, Meredith was graced by receiving flute instruction from world-class flutist Georges Barrere. He is turn was Meredith was hired as principal flutist and piccolo player for the John Philip Sousa Band from 1921 to 1923 w hile still attending the Julliard Institute. After that, he joined the New York Philharmonic Orchestra where he became principle flute player from 1924 to 1929. Seeing a greater audience ahead of him he graduated to radio work thereafter, serving as concert director for KFRC in San Francisco, California (and later as musical director at NBC, first in San Francisco and then, finally in Hollywood).

In the course of a glittering career he wrote music for Chaplin's The Great Dictator ( ), as well as symphonic music, band, and choral works, including The Jervis Bay: Symphonic Variations on an American Theme and Anthem of the Atomic Age. During World War II he became a Major in the U.S. Army and was the Musical Director for the Armed Forces Radio Service. Meredith wrote "It's Beginning to Look a Lot Like Christmas" in 1951 and this went viral after famous Perry Como agreed to sing it. If the words sound familiar it's the Meredith is also remembered with affection for his role as musical director and conductor, including popular radio programs like:

Carefree Carnival (1933-1936),
Maxwell House Coffee Time (1940-19), and
Tallulah Bankhead's The Big Show (1950-1953).
He also contributed the theme song You and I for Maxwell House Coffee Time which became a number one hit, and May the Good Lord Bless You and Keep You as the The Big Show closer for every Saturday night. Meredith wrote The Unsinkable Molly Brown and which opened on Broadway in 1962, and also Here's Love (a musical adaptation of Miracle on 34th Street that and t hat opened on Broadway in 1963.

And There I Stood with My Piccolo and Eggs I Have Laid ) count among his most memorable autobiographical works. The prolific writer also wrote a novel he called Who Did What to Fedalia and an account of the making of The Music Man movie But He Doesn't Know the Territory .

Following a long and successful life Meredith Willson passed on at the age of 82 to the Great Theater in the Sky in Santa Monica on June 12, 1984 (but was buried in his hometown of Mason City, Iowa in the presence of family and long-standing friends). There's been a museum tribute and an entertainment complex dedicated to Willson in Mason City since the 1990s, so the great man's memory lives on in more than Meredith Reiniger Willson 's The Music Man ran for 1,375 sensational performances after it opened on Broadway on December 19, 1957. Amazingly the cast album won the very first Grammy Award ever presented. After that, The Music Man went on to win eight Tony Awards. Among these Meredith clocked up Best Musical, and Best Composer and Lyricist too.

Inevitably, The Music Man hit the big screen in 1962 , and became one of the most successful musicals ever filmed. Of the original cast it was really only the incomparable Robert Preston who was retained from the Broadway show. Beyond him, it was a stellar cast that included Shirley Jones, Buddy Hacket and a very young Ronnie Howard. An elaborate set was constructed in Hollywood for the filming.

Equally inevitably, the movie version premiered in Mason City in spectacular fashion. Over a hundred marching bands from throughout Iowa and across the nation participated in a four-hour parade in support of the movie studio, with Meredith Willson personally conducting the music while stars like Preston, Jones and Howard looked on and enjoyed the parade and premiere celebration.

The movie The Music Man was nominated for several Academy Awards, and won Best Musical Score. Beatle Fans still remember Paul McCartney singing the love ballad Till There Was You on their 1964 Album Meet The Beatles .
The show we were to see had opened for the season at The New Candlelight Theatre on November 8th, and was to run until December 21st unless extended. With book, music and lyrics by Meredith Willson, it told the love story between a smooth talking salesman, Professor Harold Hill, and a small town pretty librarian, Marian Paroo.

Story Line

The original intent of Professor Hill (the smooth-talking salesman) is to con the rural inhabitants of a place called River City in Iowa. The scam involves promising to start a marching band for local boys, sell the town the necessary instruments (cash up front) and then flee with all the money before they wake up to receive nothing. Needless to say there's no such actual place - at least in Iowa - although a kaleidoscope of restaurants and bars named for it have opened up since,

Fortunately for everybody (except perhaps the Music Man himself) he falls in love with the town librarian and is unable to go through with his plan. The Music Man features unforgettable songs like:

Seventy-Six Trombones led the big parade, with a Hundred-and-Ten Cornets close at hand. In the musical of which this song is the theme tune Pick-a-little, Talk-a-little ... can you believe I couldn't find a single thing on ChatNoir about this? That damn cat's got my tongue.

With such great songs, Rob and I could only agree that this would be the perfect "family" event for us too. And after that we could pick a little at the after-show buffet and talk a little with the gathered people there, I suggested. "Oh tosh," Rob said. "You talk too much anyway!"

I was delighted to see that the namesake lead was none other than my old favorite and Candlelight stalwart Robert Miller le ading the cast as Professor Harold Hill. Rob and I both knew that he was definitely no stranger to the stage, having been involved in professional theater since he had turned sixteen. His other medals on his personal scoreboard included Meet Me in St. Louis and several national tours with Fiddler on the Roof . And that's without mentioning his much-acclaimed tour around Europe as a key member of The Rocky Horror Show . Mr. Miller has also performed in and around Philadelphia at Three Little Bakers, The Walnut Street Theater, and Delaware Theater Company. This made him the eclectic star that we just knew we were going to love.

And that's really what true theater's all about. A great story line, a little slap and tickle, a professionally-run venue and a cast who know what they're about. And then of course the meal thereafter at the Candlelight Restaurant, although you'll have to wait a little longer to savor that.

I think there's a joker in the pack in all of us, just bursting to get out and have a little fun at other peoples' expense. I also think that that's what makes The Music Man such a fantastic gig for everybody. We can vicariously indulge in all our fancies, yet comfortable in the knowledge that we won't be called to cross over the Rubicon after all (because every theater story has a happy ending by definition).

I guess that escapism is a rush we all need from time-to-time too. Something to take us away from the here-and-now into the realms of what-might-have-been or what-never-was. When I was a child at school there was a poem in my workbook (I think) called "Boxes". It was the story of a factory-worker who spent his life making identical boxes every day. After his daily task was done he retired to his simple, lonely home, took out his violin and played so magnificently that it was as if he soared straight up to heaven.

Performing opposite our favorite Robert Miller was Kemper Florin as Marian Paroo (the librarian). She had most recently performed in The Walnut Street Theatre production of State Fair. But I digress. Kemper has also performed in numerous operas including her Kimmel Center debut in Mozart Bastien and Bastienne this past January. Some of her favorite roles include Maria in Rogers and Hammerstein's Sound of Music, performed with the summer stock company Ohio Light Opera Of course, these leads do not include a further smaller parts, and I've heard said that the casting advertisement stipulated "Please prepare 16-32 bars of appropriate song. Child auditioners should also come dressed in clothes in which you can dance. Headshot/resume. Must call 719-477-4387 for appointment".

The production team was lead by director Jeff Reim along with Barrymore-nominated choreographer Jody Anderson Miller. Musical direction is by Steve Weatherman, set design by John D. Smitherman, costume design by A.J. Garcia, and production stage management by Jackie Goldwurm.

And the show itself, I hear you asking? Well what more can I say than that it was absolutely fabulous. After that, I'm afraid you'll have to hear the music, admire the scenery, love the cast and enjoy the plot yourself to find out more. We all know how The Music Man ends (and life itself). The joy is in the journey and getting there.

After the show was over we retired the The Candlelight Theater's own restaurant for a delicious evening meal. As I did so, I couldn't resist softly singing that ol' familiar song

The King was in the counting house counting out the money
The Queen was in the parlor eating bread and honey
When the pie was opened the birds began to sing
Now, wasn't that a dainty dish to set before the King and Queen?

You'll have to guess which is which among us ;)

And For Happiness Sake

Check Out Our Wine List and be Pleasantly Supplied!


!
At moments like these I find I tend to wax philosophical, especially after a good show, a great meal, and a bottle of exceptionally pleasant wine. So I close with a few thoughts. What is this thing called Theater? Where did it come from? Where is it going? Will it (can it) survive in a world obsessed with virtual experience?

A Short History of Theater according to Richard

" The West "


The passion plays of Ancient Egypt are the earliest recorded theatrical events, and are said to date back to 2000 BC. In those days, tales of the god Osiris were performed annually at festivals recording the following mystic words:


While theater was pretty much a free-for-all in those ancient Egyptian times, the G reeks were a more logical lot. They arranged theater into a formal art, with strict rules (and definitions for tragedy, comedy and satyr plays . They followed the North African tradition of incorporating mythological characters though, but added the concept of acting as a serious career.


The Roman Empire transported theater to the West as it began building amphitheaters. The art form thrived in medieval England , and took on various flavors in 15th and 16th Century Russia, Italy and France. The general trend down the ages was away from Grecian poetic drama towards a more realistic style, especially following Renaissance and the Industrial Revolution. Post colonial American theater developed in isolation along somewhat different lines.

" The East "


Eastern Theatrical tradition dates back to BC1000 BC, when the ancient Indian Sanskrit dramas were performed. Chinese theater likewise dates back to those days. However Japanese forms of Kyogen, Kabuki and Noh only go back as far as the 17th Century.


"Islam"


The most popular forms of theater in the medieval Islamic world were puppet theaters and live passion plays known as ta'ziyan (where episodes from Muslim history were enacted). Shia Islamic plays revolved around the martyrdom of Ali's sons Hasan ibn Ali and Husayn ibn Ali. Secular akhraja plays were less common tccurrences.

Drama

The root of "drama" is the little words "to do". This makes a good deal of sense, for this is the branch of theatre in which things happen. Classical forms of drama, including Greek and Roman drama, classic English drama and French drama including Molire are still performed today. Is The Music Man a drama piece. Well no, not quite, although seventy six trombones are undeniably quite a dramatic sight.


Musical Theatre

Well there's certainly an element of this in The Music Man . In fact, music and theatre have always had a close relationship as it is the form of theatre combining spoken dialogue, music, songs, and dance routines that everybody loves. Modern musical theater evolved from variety shows and "follies" of the early 20th Century. Broadway musicals of the 21st Century include lavish costumes and sets supported by million dollar budgets.


Comedy

Certain theatre productions qualify as comedies, such as Boeing Boeing or As You Like It. There's a strong element of comedy in The Music Man . Stand-up comedy is also a form of theater.

Perhaps that's what's so appealing about The Music Man. It has drama, it has comedy. And it has music. That way everybody has a great evening out, and the seats are booked out to capacity too.


Horses and Courses Repertory Companies

Repertory companies rehearse multiple shows at one time - while most modern theater companies rehearse one show at a time, perform that piece for a set "run", retire the piece, and begin rehearsing a new show. These companies are able to perform various pieces from their portfolio upon request and often perform works for years before retiring them. Most dance companies operate on this repertory system. Producing versus Presenting

The Carr Theater in Amsterdam

Both a theater company and a theatrical venue are needed in order to put on a dramatic piece. Some companies, such as dance companies for example, do not have their own venues. These companies will therefore either perform at rental premises or at presenting theaters. When a theater company is the sole company in residence at a theater venue, this business (and its corresponding theater company) is called the producing theater, because the venue produces its own work. Both rental and presenting theaters have no full time resident companies though. They do, however, sometimes have one (or multiple) part time resident companies, in addition to other independent partner companies who arrange to use the space when available.


A rented theater thus allows the independent companies to seek out their space, while a presenting theatre seeks out independent companies to support their work by presenting their own on another company's stage.

However, many performing, groups have challenged this tradition and have been putting on their work in non-theatrical spaces for decades. These performances can take place outside or inside, in a non-traditional performance space, and include street theater, and site specific theater such as a museum or church.

A touring company is an independent theater or dance company that travels, often internationally, being presented at a different theater in each city.

Amateur versus Professional

Theatres run the gamut from amateur to professional. In community theatres, as well as in educational theatre, actors are typically not paid. Fringe theatre productions are typically paid, but minimally so. Broadway productions are known for their large budgets. The spectrum of amateur to professional is as follows: Community theatre Educational theatre Dinner theatre Fringe theatre Summer stock theatre Regional theatre Off-Off-Broadway Off-Broadway and Off West End Broadway theatre and West End theatre

Unions

There are many theater unions including the Society of Stage Directors and Choreographers, the Actors Equity Association (for actors and stage managers), and the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees (for designers and technicians). Many theaters require that their staff be members of these organizations. This is to create a sense of unity that prevents the core from falling apart.

The New Candlelight Theatre is located in historic Ardentown, five minutes from downtown Wilmington and 30 minutes from Center City, Philadelphia. The Music Man will open on November 8th and runs until December 21st. To purchase tickets, please call The New Candlelight Theatre box office at 302-475-2313. Tickets may also be purchased online at www.newcandlelighttheatre.com.