T he AlexianOrder was born in the 15th Century in the city of Mechlin in the Duchy of Brabant in centralFlanders, which is now called Belgium. At that time, the peoplewere afflicted by the terrible ravages of an epidemic called the"Black Death." A concerned man named Tobia called other laymentogether to offer succor to the plague-stricken, but at that stagewithout taking any vows, or adopting any rule of life of anymonastic order.
That was the way these things happened those days.There were few medical facilities for ordinary people, and they hadto help themselves. Everybody was at least nominally Catholic too.In that way things flowed together more naturally than theysometimes seem to do these days.
One of the most obvious duties that befell Tobiasand his followers was the burial of those who died from the plague,before they could spread the dread disease further. That is whythey were originally known as the "Cellites" (from the Latin cella,meaning a cell, and thus a grave). In later years, they chose aspatron the venerable Saint Alexius, who had served many faithfulyears in the Syrian hospital at Edessa. From henceforth, theycalled themselves the Alexian Brothers, as was the traditionalcustom. The Alexian movement spread throughout Germany,Brabant, Flanders, and other countries as did the plague, foreverywhere men sought something to do as solace. They were alsosometimes called the "Lollhorden" (derived from a German wordmeaning "to sing softly") on account of the chants they sung forthe departed souls of the dead.


Unfortunately for them, the Catholicauthorities confused the Alexians with another religious groupingnamed the Lollards (a Wyclifian sect of heretics following theteachings of the English scholastic philosopher,theologian, lay preacher, translator, reformer and universityteacher JohnWycliffe ). They did not escapedefamation and persecution as a result, as evidenced in the Papal instruction "Ad AudientiamNostram" of December 1377, that sought to put an end to thisunfairness. In it, Pope Gregory XI wrote to German Bishops(especially those in Cologne, Trier and Mainz) ordering them tocease abusing the "Cellites" and promising vengeance on theirpersecutors. This message was followed by similar Papal Bulls fromPope Boniface IX in January 1396, Pope Eugene IV in May 1431, andlater Pope Nicholas V and Pope Pius II too. In 1469, the Catholic center at Aix-la-Chapelle reflected the general feelingamong the Alexian Brothers that Louis deBourbon, Prince-Bishop of Liege should elevate them to thestatus of a Convent of the Order of SaintAugustine . This request was granted. After that, FatherDominicus Brock and five other Brothers took the solemn vows of thereligious. This bold move forward, and the revised Constitution ofthe Order were confirmed by Blessed Pius IX on 12 September1870. The movement spread quite rapidly after that, andbeyond the borders of Europe too. By the early 20th Century, theAlexian Brothers had established four hospitals in the UnitedStates. The first of these was established in Chicago in1866 -unfortunately this pioneering effort burned down during the Great Fire of 9 October 1871, butwas rebuilt the following year.
The second institution, built this time at St Louisin 1869, extends over an acre and houses departments for theinsane, those with nervous diseases, and those with drinkingproblems. The third that followed was erected in Oshkosh, Wisconsinin 1880. The fourth was built in Elizabeth, New Jersey on land donated by RightReverend Bishop Wigger. Dedicated physicians and surgeons continueto attend to patients there, while the Brothers nurse them, and goabout their general housework at the hospitals as they alwayshave.
In 1875, Bishop (later Cardinal) Herbert Vaughan ofSalford, England asked the Alexian Brothers to take charge of a newhome and hospital he was planning in his diocese. Later DoctorRichard Lacy (Bishop of Middlesbrough) attracted them to hisdiocese too. In 1885, the Brothers established a Province of theirOrder and a Novitiate in the United Kingdom. This was initiallyattached to St. Mary's Convent in Newton Heath, Manchester, but waslater transferred to Twyford Abbey near Ealing, which the Alexian Brothers had purchased forthemselves.

The American branch of the Alexian Order providesservices in acute care, residential elderly care, retirementcenters, and AIDS ministries in Illinois, Missouri, Wisconsin,Tennessee, Chicago, and also outside America in the Philippines andHungary too. The British and Irish Orders in London, Manchester,Dublin and Limerick provide facilities for the elderly, sick andphysically handicapped through a nursing home and day center. Theyalso provide AIDS ministries, care and rehabilitation of homelessmen, and support for people suffering from mental illness aswell. On the European continent, the German branch hasHouses in Aachen, Krefeld, Malseneck ,Munster and Twistringen. In Belgium there are Centers in Boechout,Tienen, Grimbergen and Henri-Chapelle for psychiatric services.All-in-all, the humbly concerned Tobia would have reason to beproud of the work that he began so many years ago. The Alexian Movement in theUnited States

The Order has gone from strength to strength inAmerica, where it now employs highly-skilled medical professionalsin a wide spread of disciplines to treat its patients, while theBrothers go about their caring palliative tasks inspired by theircalling inspired by God. Should you wish, there are three ways toassist their cause. These are
By joining their religious order By making a financial donation By volunteering on a part-timebasis
To find out more aboutvolunteering to serve at Alexian Brothers facilities, pleasecall: Alexian Brothers Medical Center
800 Biesterfield Rd.
Elk Grove Village, IL 60007
847-437-5500 x 4753 St. Alexius Medical Center
1555 Barrington Rd.
Hoffman Estates, IL 60169
847-755-8708 Alexian Brothers Center for Mental Health
3350 West Salt Creek Lane, Suite 114
Arlington Heights, IL 60005
847-952-7464 OutpatientAssistance

In days gone past the doors of the AlexianBrothers remained open to help and succor all the poor andsuffering. As far as possible, they continue with this traditionthrough a number of outreach programs. Theseinclude:
These outpatient-assistance programs are the coreof the outpourings of the Brother's love. They do not seek to run abusiness, but to assist those in trouble as if they were the Christthemselves. A mighty medical institution has grown up around thisvision. This enables them to act it out, and respond to theircalling that "The Love of Christ Compels Us". Perhaps it shouldcompel others, like you and me too?

Main Centers and Contact Information

The following information was sourced from theAlexian Brothers Website:


The Alexian CancerInstitute uses a new genetics test for pancreatic cancer and hereditarymelanoma, and as an expanded genetics test for hereditarynon-polyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch Syndrome) too. Both tests can alert patients towards their geneticpredisposition toward cancer, enabling them to reduce their risk,to tell loved ones who might share the same potential, and to spotcancer early if it occurs. They believe that the earliest possiblediagnosis correlates best with cures." The MELARIS test for hereditary melanoma and pancreatic canceridentifies mutations in P16 genes, the main driver behindhereditary melanoma, and the risk of pancreatic cancer in somefamilies. People with this mutation have up to seventy-six per centchance of developing melanoma by age eighty, and up to fifty percent greater prospects of developing melanomas by age fifty. Incertain family groups, those with P16 mutations have up toseventeen per cent greater chance of developing pancreatic cancerby age seventy-five. These risks compare with the generalpopulation's one per cent risk of melanoma by eighty, under one percent risk of melanoma by fifty, and one per cent risk of pancreaticcancer by seventy-five. Accordingly, the MELARIS test is recommended for individualswith a family history of melanoma or pancreatic cancer, or apersonal history of melanoma, including multiple moles identifiedas the same. If the test reports a P16 issue, the prescribedtreatment usually includes increased skin examinations andlifestyle modifications, including reduced exposure to the the sunand other sources of ultraviolet radiation (such as tanning bedsetc). Carriers of P16 should wear protective clothing,wide-brimmedhats, sunglasses, and long sleeves. In fact, they need to cover asmuch of their skin as is possible. This includes sunscreen offifteen SPF (or higher) at times. Alexian doctors take an especially aggressive approach toremoving and performing biopsies on suspicious moles associatedwith P16. Detection of the mutation may can influence medicalmanagement for the victims parents, children, and siblings too. Allof these have a fifty per cent possibility of having the samemutation. That's why doctors conduct more frequent tests on them,especially during puberty or pregnancy when moles are changingrapidly. The latest Alexian cancer tests include full sequenceanalysis of the MSH6 gene too. Mutations in this gene are blamed for ten to fifteen percent ofall gene mutations related to Lynch Syndrome. The test also seeksout mutations in the MLH1 and MSH2 genes - also linked to cancer.It's recommended for individuals with a personal or family historyof colorectal, endometrial, ovarian or gastric cancer, particularlywhen cancer has struck before age fifty. Testings such as COLARISand MELARIS involve drawing blood, from which DNA is analyzed. Inthe event of gene mutations, the patient meets with one of theCancer Institute's medical oncologists, to determine what ought tobe done next. The Cancer Institute also offers risk assessments andgenetic testing for breast cancer and other cancers. As in allother medical tests, these do not offer one hundred per centdetection, but they can help people better understand their risk ofcancers, and use that knowledge wisely. Gamma Knife Centre
In an increased drive to bring advancedneuroscientific treatments to Chicago's northwest suburbs, theAlexian Brothers have opened a Gamma Knife Center in Illinois. Herepatients undergo non-invasive brain surgery for cancerous andbenign tumors, and also vascular malformations and functionaldisorders such as Parkinsons and Epilepsy. The advanced facility features the Leksell GammaKnife from Elekta (a Swedish supplier of innovative radiationoncology and neurosurgery equipment). It enables doctors to focuson the radiation directly, without affecting surrounding healthytissue. This equipment is still relatively rare. In fact, there areless than 100 Gamma Knife centers in America.

According to Mark Frey, Vice President of the Alexian NeurosciencesInstitute, t he Gamma Knife "has a very longhistory of being peer reviewed and studied, and it's been found tobe an efficacious way of treating brain disorders." He goes on toexpress the opinion that it's the 'gold standard' for brain-relatedradiation treatment.

The Illinois Gamma Knife Center -based in a new building on the Campus ofAlexian Brothers Medical Center in Elk Grove Village - is the latest expression of the partnershipbetween the Brothers, and the University of Illinois at Chicago'sNeurosurgery Department. Thanks to this affiliation, the Alexianfacility thereby brings on-site advanced neuro-surgical techniquesto Chicago's suburbs. This makes Gamma Knife treatment available topatients who might otherwise need to travel further to receiveit. The Leksell Knife offers a variety benefits forpatients. First and foremost, the risks of complications are fewer,and the recovery time is almost minimal when compared toconventional brain surgery. Thousands of published papers havedemonstrated that Gamma Knife treatment offers unsurpassed resultsand vastly improved life quality. That's because it allows doctorsto reach deep inside the brain without an incision, and withoutdisturbing delicate parts of the brain. It also allows them totreat several lesions at the same time, which would otherwiseinvolve several different operations. All-in-all, Gamma Knifetreatment offers an alternative when surgeons find a tumor attachedto the brain stem or a vital nerve. While other forms of external-beam radiationtreatment may involve multi-treatments over an extended time, GammaKnife surgery is often completed during a single outpatient visit.This procedure typically takes about four hours, including advancedimaging, treatment planning and the radiation treatment itself,which is usually referred to as radio-surgery. Every year overthirty-five thousand patients around the world undergo theseprocedures with minimal side effects. Although they will needtransport to and from the clinics (because sedation may benecessary for relaxation purposes) in reality there is no recoveryperiod involved at all, and many can get back to normal life almostimmediately.
According to an academic source, "the Gamma Knifedelivers a high dose of ionizing radiation from 201 cobalt-60sources. A surgeon guides the cobalt radiation to a targetpreviously defined by advanced imaging techniques. When used totreat a tumor, the Leksell Gamma Knife packs the tumor with severaldifferent doses of cobalt radiation, aiming at a series of targetsbased on a three-dimensional image of the tumor. Each of theindividual 201 radiation beams are too weak to damage normaltissues crossed by the beams on their way to the target. But, whenfocused precisely on the target, the beams together deliver enoughradiation to treat the targeted area. The Gamma Knife has such afocused effect in the target zone that the changes are consideredsurgical in their precision. It's not an actual knife at all,although the radiation functions with scalpel-likeprecision."
During treatment, the patient's head is placedinside a stereotactic frame. This is inturn inserted into a collimator helmetthrough which the radiation is delivered. A computer-based APSmoves the patient's head to a number of defined treatmentcoordinates, according to the treatment plan. Gamma Knife surgery requires the presence of aneurosurgeon, a radiation oncologist, a physicist and a nurse.Three Alexian radiation oncologists, one neurosurgeon and twophysicists attended a Gamma Knife training program recently at theUniversity of Pittsburgh Medical Center. At the same time, threeAlexian nurses received specialized training at ColumbiaPresbyterian Hospital in New York City. The Chief Surgeon meanwhileunderwent Gamma Knife training himself at the Karolinska Institutein Stockholm, which is one of Europe's largest medicaluniversities. This adds Gamma Knife surgery to the Institute'sother neuroscience specialties. The addition of the Illinois GammaKnife Center will further strengthen the network's standing as thepremier health-care provider in Chicago's northwest suburbs. Thisnetwork is already a highly successful and advanced medicalenterprise,with excellent physicians and facilities that are verymodern and advanced. Who would have thought - especially thosemedieval priests, that all this could flourish from such simplebeginnings? Veterans Center
A resource center for Iraqi and Afghanistanmilitary veterans and their families operates on the grounds of theAlexian Brothers Medical Center in Elk Grove Village, Illinois, asthe Alexian Brothers strive to address the needs of militaryfamilies and their loved ones. It's located in the Roncoli Center,a resource base offering psychological counseling, as well aspractical guidance for accessing benefits and services available toall veterans. The center is open on Thursdays - with drop-in hoursbetween eight a.m. and twelve p.m. - and appointment hoursthereafter through to 4:30 in the afternoon.
In so doing, the Institute is partnering with theIllinois Department of Veterans Affairs. The former provides thespace, the VA department the psychologist, and a service officer towork with veterans and their families. This is an outgrowth of aseries of symposiums sponsored by the Workforce DevelopmentLearning Institute, that hopes to assist Iraqi and Afghanistan warveterans, their families - and the loved ones of deceased soldiers- cope with the complex emotional and practical issues that theyoften face. The well attended symposiums proved an unmet needfor veterans' support services in Chicago's northwest suburbs.Independently, officials at VA centers in Rockford and Evanston,Illinois, detected a spike in closed cases involving veterans fromthe northwest suburbs. Possibly, many of these veterans previouslysought help once, but never returned because their journey was toolong. Although these cases are now closed, VA officials areconvinced that these veterans still have unmet needs. This is atheory that will be tested through the new resource center.

It will help veterans and theirfamilies cut through red tape and navigate "the complexities ofbureaucracy," a doctor says. "Since the symposiums were held,Alexian Brothers have been on the fore-front of supporting veteransand their family members. Having a veterans center on the premiseswill allow us to continue facilitating the process."
The sheer number of veterans who attended thesymposiums was notable too. At the first two symposiums, theirfamily members dominated. Later, veterans arrived who had gonethrough the system and lacked the answers they still needed. Now,they are coming to Alexian Brothers in increasing numbers, to learnmore about the options for addressing their health and benefitconcerns - and more about their hopes for the future too." Clinical Trails Clinical trials are at the heart of medicalresearch, for without them it is impossible to test the outputs ofthis work. Moreover, they also take place in a medically-safeenvironment, within which the possibilities of cross-contaminationare considerably lower
In March 2007, the Institute announced that it hadbegun screening patients for enrollment in a new Phase III study,that would evaluate the safety and efficacy and safety of fingolimod . This is a new, once-daily oralmedication for investigating the causes of relapsing-remittingmultiple sclerosis. Researchers hoped that the twenty-four monthrandomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study program (knowncolloquially as "FREEDOMS" (for FTY720 Research Evaluating Effectsof Daily Oral Therapy in Multiple Sclerosis) would include overtwo-thousand MS patients in approximately two-hundred study centersworldwide.
"If the Phase III FREEDOMS study program confirmsthe data demonstrated in the Phase II study program and leads toFDA approval, then FTY720 may represent an improvement whencompared to currently-available injectable medications," hopesDoctor Vipan Gupta, who was the Alexian Brothers Principal StudyInvestigator at that time.

The FREEDOMS study program includedpatients between the ages of eighteen andfifty-five with RRMS Eligible patients wereequally randomized to receive either study treatment with FTY720, or balancing placeboonce daily for up to 24 months. The initial endpoint of the studywas to be the relapse rate at twenty-four months. In Multiple Sclerosis, inflammatory lymphocytes (orT-cells) are thought to be responsible for the destruction of theprotective myelin coating - this surrounds the nerves in key areasof the brain and spinal cord in a protective sheath. When damaged,this hinders the capacity of the nerves to transmit electricsignals. The end-results are problems with muscle movement,coordination, balance and cognition. The drug FTY720 has a novel mechanism that'sdifferent from all other known therapies. It binds itself to thesphingosine 1-phosphate receptor-1's on circulating lymphocytes,thereby reversibly trapping a proportion of them in the lymphnodes. As a result of this, FTY720 is able to lower the number ofactivated T-cells, that circulate in the bloodstream and centralnervous system. The Phase II first twelve month results publishedin the New England Journal of Medicine, demonstrated that FTY720reduced the rate of clinical relapses and inflammatory disease asmeasured by MRI over the first six months of the study - whencompared to the placebo control group. After six months, theplacebo patients were switched to active therapy instead. The PhaseII twelve-month data showed that many patients taking once-dailyoral FTY720 were free of relapses over two years. They alsomaintained a low rate of inflammatory disease, when measured bymagnetic resonance imaging. Notably, the patients who receivedplacebo for the first six months also experienced an improvementafter switching across to FTY720, and this improvement lasted rightthrough to the end of the trial.

There are over two million peopleworldwide estimated to suffer from multiplesclerosis . Approximately four hundredthousand of these are thought to be in America. Moreover, MS isalso the leading cause of neurological disability in young adults.The disease has a debilitating impact on the sufferer's socialactivities, employment prospects and overall quality of life. It isthe most common chronic, disabling disease of the central nervoussystem, affecting twice as many women than men, for reasons thatremain unclear. Patients suffer acute self-limiting attacks ofneurological dysfunction followed by complete or incompleteremission. Over time, the transmission of electrical nerve impulsesis disrupted, nerve cells are destroyed, and patients experiencesymptoms ranging from fatigue, tingling, numbness and blurredvision, right through to poor muscle control with partial orcomplete paralysis, speech or mental impairment. Those kind young me who helped bury the BlackDeath victims in those dark days when there was no formal medicine,will surely rest easier now. Human suffering is less, the prognosisfor healing more. We have so much to thank them for, even thoughthey could never have imagined the consequences of their dreams andprayers.

Awards and Accolades

As might be expected, the Alexian Institute andits faithful volunteers and Brothers continue to receiverecognition for their life's work.

The Brothers have received Disease-SpecificCare Certification from the Joint Commission for their commitmentto excellence across thirteen disease-management programs. Inrecognition of this, the Joint Commission presented a Gold Seal ofApproval in respect to the quality of health-care in every one ofthese. In fact, the Alexian Brothers Behavioral Health Hospital inHoffman Estates, Illinois was the first hospital in the entirenation to win certification in four separate psychiatricspecialties. These are depression, chemical dependency, eatingdisorders and self injury. And that's no mean achievement.

Forabout nine months, each member of the investigative team thoroughlyexamined every program's structure and processes, comparing themagainst best practices world-wide and identifying strengths andareas for improvement. This process enhanced the interfaces betweenthe Alexian Brothers Medical Center, and the Saint Alexius teamsexamining the same disease management programs at their respectivehospitals. They worked together across acute-care facilities,transferring learning experiences from each facility to theother.
"It was all about going through the process correctly," aninvigilator said. "That's what impressed the Joint Commission most- the facts and data that were gathered were analyzed to ensurethat appropriate actions were taken, and they came uppositive."
The teams will continue to measure the programs' progress,relaying information about improvements to the Joint Commission oneyear after the programs' initial certifications.These programs mustundergo an on-site review by the Joint Commission every two years,to be considered for re-certification in the years that lieahead. A Brief Conclusion

The above is but one example of the results Tobias and hisfollowers achieved all those years ago. They stand as supremeexample of what can happen when "The Love of Christ Compels Us".These days, of course, we believe this Love works through manydifferent ways, and through many religions too.

The trusting imagination of Tobias - then scarcely more than ateenager himself - stands in stark contrast to our modernmaterialistic society, in which self so often seems to come first.Yet there is hope. The wheel is turning again. Somewhere, the nextTobias is wiping the sleepy dust from his eyes, and saying "Lord,yes I can. I'm going to do it right now".



