Penguins are populararound the world primarily for their unusually upright, waddlingpace, their magnificent swimming ability, and in relation to otherbirds, a lack of fear toward humans. Their striking black and whiteplumage is often likened to a tuxedo suit and as such is oftenparodied in films and television shows

Penguins have gained popular recognition inthis format most recently in the 21st Century. This is due to filmssuch as March of the Penguins, a very well received documentary onthe life and breeding habits of emperor penguins. As well as in theanimated children's films Madagascar, Happy Feet, and Surf's Up.The BBC used this new found love of Penguins on April 1, 2008 whenthey released a short film of penguins in flight and migrating tothe South American rainforest as an April Fool'sjoke. This was a hugely popular showwhich was in a large part responsible for an entire generationslove of penguins and which still continues to be a popularinfluence to this day.

This bird is oftensubject to anthropomorphism as it is commonly depicted as a proudspecies that is also both comical and friendly, the old cartoonPingu is an excellent example of this.These characteristics cannothowever be attributed to any animal as they are humancharacteristics imposed by a human mentality. We must accept thatthe consciousness of a Penguin is so very different to our own thatwe cannot presume to give it (accurately at least) any form ofhuman behavior, as we often do when we portray a penguin as alovable character. Perhaps in reaction to this cutesy stereotype,fictional penguins are occasionally presented as grouchy or evensinister. The popular Sanrio character Badtz Maru is an example,being cute yet somewhat surly The 1960s television cartooncharacter Tennessee Tuxedo would often escape the confines of hiszoo with his partner, Chumley the walrus. In the movie Madagascar,the penguins are cast as highly trained soldiers or governmentagents with devious schemes and plans. Penguins can also be foundin the animated series Wallace and Gromit. A malicious andintelligent penguin called Feathers McGraw plots against Gromit toforce him from his home.Whilst at the same time heand disguiseshimself as a chicken with a red rubber glove so as to commit arobbery. Penguinbiology And Adaption to the Environment

Penguins are superbly adapted to an aquaticlife. Their wings have become flippers, useless for flight in theair. In the water, however, penguins are astonishingly agile.Within the smooth plumage a layer of air is preserved, ensuringbuoyancy. The air layer also helps insulate the birds in coldwaters. On land, penguins use their tails and wings to maintainbalance for their upright stance.

All penguins are counter-shaded, this meansthat they have a white underside and a dark (mostly black)upperside. This is for camouflage as a predator looking up frombelow the water level (such as an orca or a leopard seal) hasproblems telling the difference between a white penguin belly andthe reflective water surface. The dark plumage on their backs isthought to camouflage them from above. This is probably from a timewhen sea mammals were not the only predator seeking penguins for ameal

Diving penguins reach 6 to 12 km/h (3.7 to 7.5mph), though there are reports of velocities of 27 km/h (17 mph)(which are more realistic in the case of startled flight). Thesmall penguins do not usually dive deep; they catch their prey nearthe surface in dives that normally last only one or two minutes.Larger penguins can dive deep in case of need. Dives of the largeEmperor Penguin have been recorded which reach a depth of 565 m(1870 ft) and last up to 22 minutes although this is very rare andis unlikely to matched by Emperor penguins on a regularbasis. Penguins either waddle on theirfeet or slide on their bellies across the snow, a movement called"tobogganing", which conserves energy while moving quickly. Theyalso jump with both feet together if they want to move more quicklyor cross steep or rocky terrain.

Penguins have an average sense of hearing forbirds (Wever et al 1969); this is used by parents and chicks tolocate one another in crowded colonies (Jouventin et al 1999).Their eyes are adapted for underwater vision, and are their primarymeans of locating prey and avoiding predators; in air it has beensuggested that they are nearsighted, although research has notsupported this hypothesis (Sivak et al 1987).

Penguins have a thick layer of insulatingfeathers which are designed to keep them warm in water. This isneeded due to the much higher rate of heat loss in water as opposedto in air. The Emperor penguin (the largest penguin) has thelargest body mass of all penguins, which further reduces relativesurface area and heat loss. They also are able to control bloodflow to their extremities, reducing the amount of blood which getscold, but still keeping the extremities fromfreezing. King penguins have adapted well totheir extreme living conditions in the subantarctic. To keep warm,the penguins have four layers of feathering. The outer layer offeathers are oiled and waterproof, not unlike the feathering of aduck. The inner three layers are down feathers, very effectiveinsulation. A chick is born without the oily outer layer, andtherefore cannot fish until maturity. In theextreme cold of the Antarctic winter, the females are at seafishing for food leaving the males to brave the weather bythemselves. They often huddle together to keep warm and rotatepositions to make sure that each penguin gets a turn in the centerof the heat pack. They can also drink saltwater because of their supraorbital gland which filters any excesssalt from the bloodstream. This excess salt is then excreted fromthe body in the form of a concentrated liquid which flows from thenasal passages.

One thing that iscommon among species is their food and their affinity for water.Almost all penguins feed on krill, fish, squid, and other forms ofsea life which they whilst swimming due to their naturalsuperiority in the water. Over a life time they will spend almosthalf of their existence in the oceans. When mothers lose achick, they sometimes attempt to steal another mother's chick,usually unsuccessfully as other females in the vicinity assist thedefending mother in keeping her chick. However when male Emperor Penguinsare looking after their chicks (whilst the mother feeds in theocean) it can be much more dangerous. If the father loses theirchick any other penguins whose young have died will fight to takeownership. This often results in Emperor penguins launchingthemselves towards the chick and trying to be the first to reachit. The tragic conclusion to this is that the chick is frequentlycrushed or dies from the cold before the father can bere-united. The penguins swimmingand feeding behavior has been closely documented in a number ofstudies. American physiologist Gerry Kooyman revolutionized thestudy of penguin foraging behavior in 1971 when he published hisresults from attaching automatic dive-recording devices to EmperorPenguins. He also in 1982 recorded a dive of 235 meters (770 feet)by a King Penguin in a separate study. The current maximum diverecorded exceeds 322 metres (1056 feet) at South Georgia, and amaximum time submerged of 9 minutes recorded at the Crozet Islands.The King Penguin dives to depths of 100-300 meters (350-1000 feet),spending around 5 minutes submerged, during daylight hours, andless than 30 meters (100 feet) at night.

The majority (around 88% in one study) ofdives undertaken by King Penguins are flat-bottomed; that is, thepenguin dives to a certain depth and remains there for a period oftime hunting (roughly 50% of total dive time) before returning tothe surface. They have been described as U-shaped or W-shaped,relating to the course of the dive. The bird dives in a V-shaped or'spike' pattern in the remaining 12% of dives; that is the birddives at an angle through the water column, reaches a certain depthand then returns to the surface. Other penguins dive in this latterforaging pattern in contrast. Observations at Crozet Islandsrevealed most King Penguins were seen within 30 km (18 mi) of thecolony. Using the average swimming speed, Kooyman estimated thedistance travelled to foraging areas at 28 km (17 mi). Its averageswimming speed is 6.510 km/h (46 mph). On shallower dives under 60m (200 ft), it averages 2 km/h (1.25 mph) descending and ascending,while on deeper dives over 150 m (500 ft) deep, it averages 5 km/h(3 mph) in both directions. On land, the King Penguin alternatesbetween walking with a wobbling gait and tobogganingsliding overthe ice on its belly, propelled by its feet and wing-likeflippers.

The nesting habits of penguins vary significantly depending onthe species. For instancethe breeding season is very different Mostspecies will however have an annual breeding season - springthrough summer (Marchant, 1990). The kingpenguin has the longest breeding cycle of all the penguin species,lasting 14 to 16 months. A female king penguin may onlysuccessfully produce a chick two times in every three breedingseasons (Sparks and Soper, 1987; Marchant, 1990; del Hoyo, et al.,1992). Emperor penguins breed annually during theantarctic winter, June through August (Sparks and Soper,1987). During the emperor breeding season,air temperature may drop to -60°C (-76°F) and winds may reachspeeds up to 200 kph (124 mph). For mostof the winter, antarctic penguins live in an environment ofdarkness or half-light. Why emperors breed during the harshestseason of the year is unknown, but it may be because the chicks arebetter prepared for becoming independent during the Antarcticsummer (in January or February). The environmental conditions aremore favorable for the young birds at this time (del Hoyo, et al., 1992). The fairy penguin breeds throughout the yearand has the shortest breeding cycle, about 50 days (Sparks andSoper, 1987). Whereas at the opposite end of the scales ome of the temperate penguins, like theHumboldt and the African, tend to nest throughout theyear.
The site chosen to nest is also verydifferent between species. E mperorpenguins form colonies around the shoreline of the antarcticcontinent and adjacent islands. They prefer sites on a fairly levelsurface of ice in areas sheltered from wind, with easy access tofeeding areas (Sparks and Soper, 1987; Marchant,1990). Whereas King penguins nest and breed onsubantarctic and antarctic islands. They prefer beaches and valleysof level ground or gentle slopes, free of snow and ice, andaccessible to the sea (Marchant, 1990). Adélies often nest 50 to 60 km (31.1-37.3mi.) away from the sea ice, they seek out rocky outcrops and smallislands that are free from snow and ice to form their nests.(Falla, 1937; Harrington, 1960; Johnstone, et al.,1973). Gentoo penguin colonies can be inland orcoastal on antarctic and subantarctic islands and peninsulas. Theywill again breed on beaches, in valleys, on inland hills, and oncliff tops, all places that are free of ice. (Murphy, 1947; Falla,1937; Rand, 1954) Galapagos penguins are of interest here asthey uniquely nest in volcanic caves or cracks in the rock (del Hoyo, et al., 1992). This is purely due to the environment they find themselves inas most penguin species will not have access to the safety ofvolcanic caves. The number of speciesof penguin has been and still is a matter of debate. The numbers ofpenguin species listed in the literature vary between 16 and 19species. Some sources consider the White-Flippered Penguinaseparate Eudyptula species, although today it is generallyconsidered a subspecies of the Little Penguin (e.g. Williams, 1995;Davis & Renner, 2003). Similarly, it is still unclear whetherthe Royal Penguin is merely a colour morph of the Macaroni penguin.Also possibly eligible to be treated as a separate species is theNorthern population of Rockhopper penguins (Davis & Renner,2003). Although all penguin species are native to the southernhemisphere, they are not, contrary to popular belief, found only incold climates, such as Antarctica. In fact, only a few species ofpenguin actually live so far south. Three species live in thetropics; one lives as far north as the Galapagos Islands (theGala pagos Penguin) and will occasionallycross the equator while feeding. The largest species isthe Emperor Penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri): adults average about1.1 meters (3 ft 7 in) tall and weigh 35 kilograms (75 lb) or more.The smallest penguin species is the Little Blue Penguin(also knownas the Fairy Penguin), which stands around 40 cm tall (16 in) andweighs 1 kilogram (2.2 lb). Generally larger penguins retain heatbetter, and thus inhabit colder regions, while smaller penguins arefound in temperate or even tropical climates. One thing that is common among species is their food andtheir affinity for water. Almost all penguins feed on krill, fish,squid, and other forms of sea life which they whilst swimming dueto their natural superiority in the water.

Penguins seem to have no fear of humans, andhave approached groups of explorers without hesitation.Theevolutionary history of penguins is poorly understood, as penguinfossils are rare. The oldest known fossil penguin species are theWaimanu, which lived in the early Paleocene epoch of New Zealand,about 62 million years ago. While they were not as well adapted toaquatic life as modern penguins (which first emerged in the Eoceneepoch 40 million years ago), Waimanu were flightless and loon-like,with short wings adapted for deep diving. These fossils prove thatprehistoric penguins were already flightless and seagoing, so theirorigins probably reach as far back as 65 million years ago, beforethe extinction of the dinosaurs. Penguin ancestry beyond Waimanu isnot well known, though some scientists (Mayr, 2005) think thepenguin-like plotopterids (usually considered relatives of anhingasand cormorants) may actually be an early sister group of thepenguins, and that penguins may have ultimately shared a commonancestor with the Pelecaniformes . Not quite a species of penguin but certainly an interesting pointis the existence of Isabelline penguins. Rare Penguin Species
There are 13 of the current species of penguin that areconsidered endangered. The causes of concern are generally the samefor all these species. Mainly revolving around the prevalence ofpredators and the influence of humans on the penguins environmentsas well as a number of other concerns. The following species ofpenguin are just a few of the many species that are now sadly onthe endangered list.

AfricanPenguins ( Spheniscus demersus) are another endangered species about 68cm inlength, and weigh between 2.1 and 3.7kg. Their scientific nameoriginates from Spheniscus, a diminutive of the Greek word spen,meaning a wedge. This refers to th eirstreamlined swimming shape, while demersus is a Latin word meaningplunging. In essence their name means plunging wedge. Thesepenguins must dive more deeply than other species and roam muchfurther to find food due to the lack of available food sources incomparison to other penguin habitats.

African Penguins are black aboveand white below, with a black chin and face patch separated fromthe crown by a broad white band. They have a narrow black bandacross the chest and down the flanks towards its legs. Some birdsshow a double bar on the throat and chest, which is a diagnosticfeature of Magellanic Penguins. Males tend to be larger withheavier bills, but these differences can usually only be seen whena pair is seen together. Juveniles differ from adults by beingentirely blue-grey above, and lacking the white face markings andblack breast band of the adults.

The African Penguin is the onlypenguin species that breeds in Africa, and it is found nowhereelse. Its distribution coincides roughly with the cold, nutrientrich, Benguela Current. The distribution of African Penguins isfurther determined by the availability of offshore islands asbreeding sites.

The present population is probably less than10% of that in 1900, when there was estimated to be about 1.5million birds on Dassen Island alone. By 1956 the population hadfallen to roughly half that in 1900, and had halved again by thelate 1970s, when there was an estimated 220,000 adult birds. By thelate 1980s the number had dropped to about 194,000 and in the early1990s there was an estimated 179,000 adult birds.

The reasons for the significant decline in theAfrican Penguin populations are well known. Initially, the declinewas due mostly to the exploitation of penguin eggs for food, andhabitat alteration and disturbance associated with guano collectionat breeding colonies. These factors have now largely ceased, andthe major current threats include competition with commercialfisheries for pelagic fish prey, and oil pollution. Other threatsinclude competition with Cape Fur Seals for space at breedingcolonies and for food resources, as well as predation by seals onpenguins. Feral cats are present and pose a problem at a few of thecolonies. African Penguins also face predation of eggs and chicksby avian predators such as Kelp Gulls and Sacred Ibises, whilenatural terrestrial predators, such as mongoose, genets and leopardare present at the mainland colonies. In all the African Penguinhas a whole host of predators ready to eat them or their eggs, andadded to that the influence of humans is wiping out their foodsources and contaminating their habitats.

One of six species ofcrested penguin, the Erect-crested (Eudyptessclateri) is only found in the New Zealandsubantarctic region and as such is very rare. The majority of thepopulation is on the Antipodes and Bounty Islands, with smallernumbers on the Auckland and Campbell groups. Juveniles straggle tothe New Zealand mainland, often to moult.

One of the largest of the crested penguins,the erect-crested penguin stands approximately 50cm tall and weighsup to 4kg. The parallel brush-like crests identify this species,however it is easily confused with the Fiordland and Snares crestedpenguins, particularly at sea.

Inhabitants of the sub-antarctic oceans,erect-crested penguins breed in large colonies on rocky coasts,often climbing very steep faces to breed on rock platforms.Erect-crested penguins often breed alongside rockhopperpenguins.

The males return to their breeding colonies inSeptember, the females following two weeks later. Competition fornest sites can be fierce and fighting is common. A very simple nestis made, often comprising of just a few stones and a little mud.Two eggs are laid, the first of which is usually lost. The secondegg is up to 100% larger than the first, and is the only oneseriously incubated. The chicks fledge in February and the adultsreturn to sea for the winter after moulting in March.

Little is known about the erect-crested'sdiet, but it is thought that they are pelagic feeders, dining onfish and krill near the surface. They may travel hundreds ofkilometers in search of food.

This is one of the most curious species ofendangered penguins because their declining population is amystery. The population of erect-crested penguins is decreasing ,but the extent of this decline, and the reasons for it, are notunderstood. Most of their breeding habitats are free of introducedpredators, so this does not appear to be a significantfactor. Theenvironment could perhaps be a significant factor but there is notenough research to support any hypothesis at this time.

Hopefully thisresearch will help to save some of the most endangered speciesbefore it's too late. This will also perhaps help to prevent achange in the global ecosystem which could lead to many morespecies becoming endangered or extinct. This research needs to bedone urgently so that are changing environment does not become ourfinal destruction. All the species on Earth are so closelyintermingled in ways we do see and in many ways that are invisibleto us. The global change in climate could have much furtherreaching effects than some species of penguin becoming extinct. Therelationship between life on this planet is such that we could facean entire restructuring of the ecosystem if changes are not made toreduce our affect on the environment. This is something thathumanity itself may not be able to survive. This just shows theimportance of the ecological and biological research being done andhow important it is that we take note of their findings.
