In terms of revenue generated, PVC is one of the most valuable products of the chemical industry . All over the world, more than 50% of PVC manufactured is being used for construction. As a building material, it is cheap, durable, and at the same time it is also easy to assemble. Quite recently, PVC has replaced traditional building materials like wood , concrete and clay in many fields. T he PVC world market has grown at an average rate of approximately 5% during the last few years and its consumption may reach a volume of 40 milion tons by 2016.


Polyvinyl chloride or PVC is the world's most versatile plastic which is used to make everything from simple food wrap to auto body parts to water pipes. PVC is made up of two simple building blocks. It consists of 60% chlorine, derived from common salt and 40% ethylene that is derived from crude oil. The resulting compound, called ethylene dichloride, is converted at high temperatures to vinyl chloride monomer or VCM gas. Through the chemical reaction which is known as polymerization, VCM becomes a chemically stable, polyvinyl chloride resin. PVC resin is then combined with a wide range of other materials like plasticisers, stabilisers, lubricants and colorants for producing rigid or flexible products. PVC is one of the largest-selling plastic and it is the most versatile one as it is used in hundreds of consumer as well as industrial products all over the world.




In recent years, PVC has started replacing traditional building materials like wood, concrete and clay in many places. Despite the fact that it appears to be an ideal building material, concerns are being raised bout the environmental and human health effects of PVC.

Polyvinyl chloride is produced from its monomer called vinyl chloride (chemical formula CH2=CHCl). PVC is actually hard plastic that can be made softer and more flexible by adding plasticizers, the most widely used being phthalates .

PVC has made a tremendous improvement in the field of plumbing. It can be used to replace cast iron and galvanized pipe in almost every situation. It is not only light weight and easy to work with, but at the same time, it is also available in many different sizes. PVC fittings as well as the related materials are easily available at all plumbing and hardware stores. This article discusses PVC pipes, fittings, its uses and installation.


Atomic Structure Cl H Cl H Cl H \ / | | | | C == C -> -- C -- C -- C -- C -- / \ | | | | H H H H H H Vinyl Chloride Monomer Polymer PolyVinyl Chloride


Preparation of PVC
Polyvinyl chloride or PVC is produced by polymerization of the monomer vinyl chloride. As 57% of its mass is chlorine , creating a given quantity of PVC requires less petroleum as compared to many other polymers.


History

Polyvinyl chloride was accidentally discovered on two different occasions during the 19th century. It was first discovered in the year 1835 by Henri Victor Regnault and it was again discovered in the year 1872 by Eugen Baumann. On both these occasions, the polymer appeared in the form of white solid inside the flasks of vinyl chloride which had been left exposed to sunlight. During the early 20th century, a Russian chemist named Ivan Ostromislensky and Fritz Klatte from the German chemical company Griesheim-Elektron attempted to use polyvinyl chloride in commercial products, but the difficulties faced by them in processing the rigid and sometimes brittle polymer imposed a hindrance against their efforts. During the year 1926, Waldo Semon and the B.F. Goodrich Company developed a method for plasticization of PVC by blending it with different additives. The result of the efforts was much more flexible and an easily-processed material that quickly achieved a widespread commercial use.




The w ide range of useful properties offered by PVC make it a versatile pipe material. Corrosion Resistance: Polyvinyl chloride is a non-conductor of electricity and at the same time it is immune to electrochemical reactions which are caused by acids, bases, and salts which lead corrosion in metals. . Consequently, PVC pipe is cost effective in those applications where soil is aggressive. As a matter of fact, PVC pipe can outlast alternative pipes without the use of protective coatings or liners.

Chemical Resistance: PVC pipes are resistant to a number of the chemical reagents in temperatures up to 140°F and are these are also resistant to chemicals which are normally used in homes. The chemical resistance property of PVC is also evidenced due to its frequent use as a protective liner for other pipe materials.

Light Weight: PVC pipes offer weight benefit which is an important safety aspect. This property minimizes the chances of worker injury and also facilitates lower cost installation and transportation. An average person can easily carry two 20 feet lengths of 4 inch PVC pipes, but the same person can carry less than 5 feet of 4 inch iron pipe.

Long-Term Tensile Strength: Com pounds of PVC pipe are formulated in such a manner that they attain long-term tensile strength. The long-term HDB or hydrostatic design basis for PVC is more than double as compared to other common thermoplastic pipe materials.

Flexibility: The modulus of elasticity of polyvinyl chloride is a major advantage in case of buried applications, particularly in those places where soil movement is anticipated. In case of pressure applications, polyvinyl chloride's modulus of elasticity reduces the magnitude of pressure surges.

Abrasion Resistance: PVC pip es are known to exhibit outstanding resistance to wear and abrasion. These pipes have proven to be more durable than metal, concrete or clay pipes for transportation of abrasive slurries.

Watertight Joints: One of the major advantage of almost all piping applications is their joint tightness. PVC pipes are easily available with deep insertion, push-together gasketed joints and the gasketed PVC pipe joints have always out-performed the joints of traditional pipe products in service. They are simple and yet easy to assemble. These can be filled, tested and placed in service soon after assembly.

Coefficient of Friction: PVC pipes offer smoother wall surfaces which help to reduce fluid friction and resistance to flow. The hydraulic smoothness inhibits the buildup of slime in sewers and also eliminates encrustation and tuberculation in water distribution mains. The end results are lower maintenance costs accompanied with more efficient initial pipeline design Impact Strength: PVC pipes possess relatively high resistance to impact damage under normal conditions as compared to other pipes made from clay, concrete and other conventional materials. Despite the fact that PVC pipes exhibit a reduction in impact strength at extremely low temperatures, the impact strength still remains more than adequate. It usually exceeds the impact strength of alternate pipe materials.

Longer Lengths: P VC pipes are generally available in lengths of either 20 feet or 14 feet. As the length is considerable, this reduces the number of joints required in comparison to other pipe products. Fewer joints obviously permit faster and efficient installation, less hydraulic friction, and lesser chances for leakage.

Water Quality: Non corrosive nature of PVC pipes and resistance to chemical attack renders it non reactive with drinking water. The PVC pressure pipes do not alter the water quality. The best part is that there are no corrosion byproducts with PVC pipes. These pipes have been tested extensively by using aggressive waters in order to verify their safety advantage.

Favorable Cost: P VC pipe is competitive with other pipes, specially in case of installation and life cycle operating costs.

Thermal Insulation: Thermal conductivity of PVC is lower than that of traditional pipe materials. This characteristic has made PVC pipe desirable for a variety of thermal insulation applications.

Flame Resistance: PVC pipe is not only difficult to ignite but at the same time, it does not continue to burn in the absence of an external ignition source. Its spontaneous ignition temperature is 850°F. This temperature is well above the spontaneous ignition temperature of most of the construction materials. PVC pipe is also referred as a self-extinguishing pipe because the products of combustion have a tendency to immediately combine with any available oxygen and as a result, the flame is starved of oxygen.

Environmental Benefit: As a raw material, PVC is energy efficient to process. More than half of the raw material used for the production of resin is provided by salt and as we all know, there is virtually an unlimited supply of salt. PVC pipe is also efficient to manufacture and transport, by making use of less nonrenewable resources than their competing materials. Due to the durable nature of PVC, the long life of PVC pipes essentially eliminates the question of disposal but at the same time PVC is a recyclable material, with the existing markets for recycled material, and the new ones continually developing.




PVC can be used under the ground or above the ground in buildings. It can be used outdoors in case the pipe contains stabilizers and UV inhibitors in order to shield against ultraviolet radiation and it is also painted with a water-based latex paint.

1. Electric wires

PVC is used as an insulating material on electric wires and the plastic used for this purpose has to be plasticized. In case of a fire, PVC-coated wires result in the formation of HCl fumes and the chlorine serves the purpose of scavenging free radicals and acts as a the source of the material's fire retarder. While HCl fumes can pose a health hazard, HCl dissolves in moisture and breaks down onto surfaces, particularly in those areas where the air is cool. Quite frequently in those applications, where smoke can be a major hazard as in case of tunnels, PVC free low-smoke, zero-halogen or LSOH cable insulation is preferred.


2. Pipes

PVC is also being widely used for the production of pipes. In water distribution market, PVC accounts for 66 percent of the market in US, and in case of sanitary sewer pipe applications, it accounts for 75 percent of share. Its light weight, low reactivity and high strength make it particularly suitable to this purpose. In addition to this, PVC pipes can easily be fused together by using various solvent cements,thus creating permanent joints which are impervious to any kind of leakage. Despite PVC's innumerable advantages, in cases where ease of dis-assembly and very high strength are required, metal pipes are still being preferred.

In the US and Canada, PVC pipes account for the largest majority of pipe materials being used in buried municipal applications for the purpose of drinking water distribution and waste water mains. A detailed review of PVC pipes in North America is found in an article titled Thermoplastics at Work, which is a A Comprehensive Review of Municipal PVC Piping Products.



PVC pipes are manufactured in a variety of sizes and dimensions and these are generally sold in 10' and 20' lengths. PVC pipes are available in both cellular core or solid wall construction. Cellular core type of construction involves the simultaneous extrusion of three or more layers of material into the pipe wall which include a solid outer layer, a cellular core intermediate layer and finally a solid inner layer

PVC pipes are used in drains, vents, electrical wiring and to handle waste materials in buildings. These pipes are rigid, lightweight and strong. Due to its ease of installation, PVC pipes are ideal for drain applications under bathroom vanities and kitchen sinks. It works much better for plumbing instead of the old standard cast iron pipe as it does not require hot soldering, it is resistant to alkaline or toxic substances and at the same time it is is easy to install. There are two kinds of PVC pipes, which are defined in standards. These are type 40 which find their applications in personal homes and type 80, which are used in industrial settings.




PVC piping system components can easily be manufactured in a wide variety of colors. As a result, identification of application is quite easy. A common color scheme that is generally used is: White color is used for for DWV (Drain - Waste - Vent) and some of the low pressure applications. White, blue, and dark gray colors are used for cold water piping. Green color is used for sewer service. Dark gray color is used for the purpose of industrial pressure applications. It must be mentioned that this color scheme is not a universal one. Moreover, this color scheme has an exception. It must be noted that the white PVC pipe is dual rated for the purpose of DWV and pressure applications.

Precaution: PVC piping systems should not be used to store or convey compressed air or any other gases. At the same time, PVC piping systems should not even be tested with compressed air or any other gases for the purpose of safety.

Marking on PVC Pipes:

As printing on PVC pipes is quite simple, markings are always very easy to identify. According to the ASTM standards, PVC pipes should be labeled in terms of the manufacturer's name and/or trademark, the standard to which the pipe conforms, pipe size, material designation, DWV, if used for drainage, pressure rating if used for pressure, SDR number and in case the pipe is used for potable water, then in that case, a laboratory seal or a mark attesting to the suitability for potable water.

Installation of PVC Piping Systems Installation of PVC piping systems is quite easy. Contractors love to use this lightweight piping material.

Its light weight makes it very easy for the plumber to handle. When doing any kind of plumbing replacement in a building, it's worth giving PVC pipe a try.
PVC can be cut quite easily with the help of a hacksaw, but abrasive disks are also made for miter saws and these work better to get a straight edge. It should always be remembered that a joint that is skewed due to a pipe not being cut straight may throw off the entire pipeline.

Measure twice, and cut once. After cutting, all shavings should be cleaned out of the pipe and the inside edges should be burred. When the pipe is cut to its proper length, lay it out on the floor with fittings in their place to make sure that the length is correct. If it is of the required length, then proceed to installation.


Installation can be done just by following some simple steps:
1. Follow the recommended safe work practices and local code requirements. 2. Follow the proper handling procedures.
3. Read the installation instructions given by the manufacturer. 4. Keep pipes and fittings in their original packaging until required.
5. Cover pipes and fittings with tarp in case you have to store them outdoors.
6. Inspect any pipe for damage just prior to use.
7. Use only those tools which have been specifically designed for use.
8. Use a drop cloth in order to protect finishes.

While joining PVC pipe and fittings with the help of solvent cement, you should always c ut the pipe ends square, bevel the pipe ends with the help of a chamfering tool, use proper primer and solvent cement, use a proper size applicator, rotate the pipe with one fourth turn while bottoming pipe in the fitting socket, avoid puddling of cement or primer in fittings as well as the pipe.
For threaded connections, you should always make use of Teflon tape or approved paste thread sealant and at the same time you must assemble the threaded joints carefully which should not be more than two turns past finger tightness.

In order to support PVC piping systems properly, a llow space for movement due to expansion or contraction, use hangers which have been specifically designed for use with plastic, protect from nails, screws and any kind of abrasive surfaces.
While testing any installed PVC piping system you must f ollow the manufacturer's recommended cure time before subjecting it to pressure testing. Testing should be done in accordance with the local codes. Make use of only glycerin and water solutions for the purpose of freeze protection whenever applicable.



3. Portable Electronic Accessories

PVC is being used as a composite that is used for the production of accessories and housings in case of portable electronics. Through a fusing process, it can easily adopt cleaning properties as possessed by materials like wool or cotton which are capable of absorbing dust particles and bacteria.


4. Signs

In flat sheet form, PVC is being formed in a various thicknesses and colors. In the form of flat sheets, PVC is generally expanded to create voids inside the material, thus providing additional thickness without adding additional weight or cost. Sheets of PVC are cut by using saw and rotary cutting equipment. Plasticized PVC is also being used to produce thin adhesive-backed films which are referred simply as vinyl. These films are generally cut on a computer-controlled plotter or these may be printed in a wide-format printer. These sheets and films are being used to produce variety of commercial signage products on vehicles.




6. PVC Floors

In many countries the good insulation (thermal as well as acoustical) properties of PVC have been used to build flexible flooring. You can easily find uncounted designs of vinyl flooring in the market, coming from the imitation of wood or ceramic designs to plain colors or artificial designs. The surface may be smooth or structured as in the case of ceramics. Special surfaces textures avoid slipping when it is wet.Very special floorings are made using woven PVC fibers. PVC can used to produce a wide range of designs like imitation parquet, tiles, marble and so on. These coverings are quite easy to lay and improve the room comfort by retaining heat and reducing external noise. PVC flooring is also very easy to clean and at the same time it is long lasting. In case of replacement, it can be recycled to new PVC flooring.




uPVC or Rigid PVC is being used in the building industry in the form of a low-maintenance material. The material is available in a wide range of colors and finishes, which also include photo effect wood finish, and it is is used as a substitute in place of painted wood, generally for window frames and sills while installing double glazing or in replacing older single glazed windows. It has got many other applications including fascia, and siding or weatherboarding. This material has also replaced the use of cast iron for drainage, plumbing, waste pipes, drainpipes and gutters.



Unplasticized poly vinyl chloride is one of the most widely used thermoplastic materials used for pipe installations. Being odourless and tasteless it is suitable for carrying potable water and a number of food products. It has excellent chemical resistance and offers good resistance to abrasion. It is light in weight and easy to join together. This makes unplasticized poly vinyl chloride a good alternative to other traditional materials. It is resistant to most of the acids, alkalis, salts and solvents which can be mixed with water. Thus the chemical resistance properties of unplasticized poly vinyl chloride are excellent.

Application Guidelines For Flexible PVC Pipes

Flexible PVC pipes should always be used according to the following guidelines: These should NEVER be used where there is a constant "dead head" pressure. In other words, there should normally be a flow of fluid through the pipe. These may be used in swimming pools, hottubs, spas, whirlpool bathtubs, irrigation (provided it is after the valve), ponds, drainage, conduit and suction applications apart from other applications. As long as there is flow in the pipe, you may use it within the rated specifications.

These pipes should not be used with "booster pumps" applications. In other words, these should not be used in two pumps in series. In such situations, when the flow stops and starts repeatedly, it produces a "hydraulic hammer" effect. As a result of this effect, the glue joints may eventually fail. Standard swimming pool pumps are fine but the booster pumps in addition to the standard pumps are not. It must be noted that the pipe itself rarely fails but the fitting connection is where it generally fails. In case the pipe is buried in the ground where there are sharp rocks, the rocks may rub a hole in the pipe. This should be kept in mind while burying a pipe.

White Flex PVC is not suitable for potable or drinking water applications. There is nothing toxic in this pipe, but it may pick up a "plastic taste" if water sits in it for several hours. It is because of this reason that it doesn't have a potable water rating.t. Same rule applies for black or gray. Neither of these can be used for potable or drinking water.

These pipes are is not resistant to insects and in particular termites as termites have been known to eat these pipes. Research has shown that flexible PVC does not attract termites, but in case a flexible PVC pipe is placed in between a termite nest and a source of food, then the termites may try to eat their way through it. You must lace your backfill and trenches with boric acid in order to reduce the likelyhood of termites, but remember that it won't last forever. In case you have termite infestation and at the same time, you wish to use Flexible PVC pipe, then in such a case you should retreat your trenches after every few years in order to be safe, just as you do your for your house, garage, etc.

Flexible PVC pipes are not suitable as a flue for a furnace or a heater. The heat may cause the pipe to become soft and it will collapse upon itself. It may possibly cause a kink in the pipe and then obstruct the airway.



Performance of PVC


As PVC resin can easily be combined with many additives and modifiers, it can meet the requirements for a wide range of products in different industries. PVC has often been chosen over other materials due to its low cost, versatility and performance properties.
It is strong, durable, moisture and abrasion resistant; electrically non conductive; withstands rust and corrosion and at the same time it has has excellent fire performance properties.


PVC can be produced in virtually any color and the end products range from opaque to crystal-clear. It can easily be modified to produce products that are as rigid as pipe or as flexible as food wrap and upholstery.


As it contains less than fifty percent of petroleum based material, PVC can be considered as the most energy-efficient plastic. As it has been used for more than fifty years, it is one of the world's most analysed as well as tested materials.




Health And E nvironmental Concerns

Due to environmental concerns, the use of polyvinyl chloride is discouraged by some local authorities in some countries like Germany and Netherlands. These concerns are about flexible PVC as well as rigid uPVC. Not only the plasticizers used in PVC are seen as problematic but also the emissions that result from manufacturing and disposal.



The Healthy Building Network is trying to accelerate the transition from PVC building materials to safer and healthier alternatives that may offer equal or even superior performance at comparable prices.

PVC is the worst form of plastic from an environmental health perspective, posing unique and major hazards in its manufacture and disposal. Global vinyl production is over 30 million tons per year and more than 70% of PVC is being used for building applications.

When the entire life cycle of PVC is taken into consideration, it becomes obvious that this seemingly innocuous plastic is actually one of the most environmentally hazardous materials produced.

All over the world, various governments and companies are taking steps to reduce or eliminate the production PVC. In almost all European nations, some uses of PVC have been eliminated. Dozens of green buildings, including hospitals have now been built with little or no PVC. Leading manufacturers have been able to develop PVC-free product lines and a number of PVC-free products are appearing in the marketplace every month.

In this section, answers have been provided to some to typical questions that are often asked on PVC and its impacts on health and environment.


Q1. What is the design life of a PVC pipe?
Ans1. PVC can last for the design life of a home in which it has been installed. As it is rustproof and also chemical resistant, design life of 100 years can be expected.
Q2. Is PVC resistant to UV radiations?
Ans2. Due to its inherent design, a PVC pipe contains stabilizers which protect the pipe against U V radiations present in sunlight. Some discoloration may occur due to exposure to sunlight. Several years of exposure may result in slight reduction in impact resistance of the material. This problem can be virtually eliminated by painting the exposed pipe area with a latex paint

Q3. Is PVC pipe made from a recyclable material?
Ans3. Yes. PCV pipes can be pulverized and returned for extrusion process to manufacture a new PVC pipe. Currently there are no standards for this. Due to its long life, PVC hasn't had enough exposure to recycling.
Q4. Is PVC pipe made from a fireproof material?
Ans 5 . Like any other plastic, PVC pipe will melt if it is subjected to high temperatures but at the same time, it stops that process as soon as the fire source is removed. Studies have shown that PVC pipe in any typical installation is less than one percent of all combustible materials in a building.

PVC not only has low flammability but also a low rate of heat release due to its low organic and high chlorine content. Pure PVC will self-extinguish soon after the external heat or flame source has been removed. Rigid PVC materials like those used for pipes, vertical blinds and siding, have been recognised for their excellent fire retardant properties. As far as the flexible PVC products are concerned, their fire properties depend on the quantity and composition of the plasticiser added
Q5. Is VCM or Vinyl Chloride Monomer hazardous?
Ans 5 . Like many other manufacturing processes, the production of polyvinyl chloride involves the use of materials which can be hazardous in case they are improperly handled. The raw material, which is or vinyl chloride monomer is the chief concern.

During the 1970s, the scientists found a link between prolonged, high level exposure to VCM or Vinyl Chloride Monomer among PVC production workers and a rare form of liver cancer which is called angiosarcoma. As a result of this, radical changes to technology and processes were introduced to protect the health of the workers. These days, the polyvinyl chloride production process is a closed one, as a part of which the activities involving VCM are made to take place in sealed vessels. This minimizes the exposure to workers and also reduces environmental emissions along with flammability risks. Exposure limits are below one-thousandth of what they used to be earlier, and as a result no cases of the cancer have been detected in case of workers joining the industry since that time

Q6. How much quantity of manufactured chlorine goes into the PVC industry?
Ans 6 . About 35% of chlorine produced worldwide is used in the PVC industry. Chlorine is a commonly occurring element. Man made chlorine is vital to a number of industries producing valuable modern products.

Q7. What is the impact of PVC Additives? Ans 7. Additives constitute a very small part of the overall PVC formulation but at the same time their use is closely regulated. All the additives which are used in food and drug applications must have a specific regulatory clearance
Plasticisers work as softening agents and provide low temperature flexibility in case of flexible PVC products Phthalate ester plasticizers have been safely used for more than half a century and these are some of the most studied compounds in the US from health as well as environmental viewpoint. These plasticizers are being used in medical devices, toys, wire and cable products, flooring, shower curtains, synthetic leather and in pharmaceuticals and personal care products like cosmetics and lotions. There have been no reports of adverse health as a result of phthalate exposure.
Most of the stabilisers are used in rigid PVC applications like pipe and other construction products.. Lead-based stabilizers are being used principally in PVC wire and cable insulation but lead is not being used in PVC potable water pipes. As the additives are firmly bound inside a rigid PVC matrix, these additives can not escape into the environment at levels that can pose a health risk to humans. New studies also affirm that disposal of metal stabilized PVC waste in landfills does not pose appreciable risk to human health or to the environment. As a matter of fact, PVC sheet is being used as landfill liner in order to help prevent leachate from contaminating groundwater because PVC is resistant to the aggressive conditions which are typically found there. In a nutshell, the demonstrated performance and the scientific facts about stabilizers have confirmed that they are the right choice for most rigid PVC processing.
Q8 . Does PVC pose a danger to people in case a building catches fire?
Ans 8. The toxicity of fire emissions from PVC is neither better nor worse as compared to many other common materials. The most important products in case of any fire are heat, carbon monoxide and smoke. All these are produced by all organic materials on burning. Hydrogen chloride is produced when any chlorine containing materials including PVC is burnt. It is an irritant gas which has a very pungent odor. So it is quickly detected as compared to carbon monoxide.In case of building fires, hydrogen chloride levels remain irritant but not lethal. No building fire fatality has ever been attributed to PVC by fire authorities.
Q9. Does PVC pollute soil and underground water when it is disposed of in landfills?
Ans 9. Studies have been made to test whether PVC pollutes underground water and soil in landfill. Such studies reveal that PVC does not degrade in landfill and at the same time it is not expected to add to the toxicity of leachate. As a matter of fact, minute quantities of metal stabilisers may actually leach from PVC but these quantities are considered an insignificant contribution to heavy metal concentrations found in landfill.