The Orange County Convention Center, also referred to as the OCCC is the main convention center of the Central Florida area. It is the second largest convention center in the whole of America. The only center larger is the McCormick Place in Chicago.The Orange County Convention Center covers 7 million feet of floor space, and is located on International Drive, one of the main tourist areas in the state.

The center boasts 141 meeting rooms and can accommodate anything from a small meeting to a large trade show and has hosted some of the major events in the city, including the Central Florida Auto Show and the Southern Women's Show.

The center was originally named the Orange County Convention and Civic Center or OCCCC. The plan to build the center came about in 1977 when a law was passed by Florida's State Legislature to allow counties to collect a Tourist Development Tax on top of the usual sales taxes on hotel rooms. In April 1978 there was a special election and the voters of Orange County approved this new tax at the 2% level set by the state.The following August, the Orange County Board of County Commissioners approved the location for the center in Orlando Central Park, on International Drive, and drew up plans for a 325,000 sq ft facility. In 1979, Orlando Central Park and the Orange County Board of County Commissioners struck up a deal where the Orlando Central Park would donate land for the initial facility, and give the county an option on 180,000 m 2 for future expansion. Orlando Central Park agreed to commit adjacent lands for hotel and tourist development, with an incentive of one cent per taxed dollar of the Tourist Development Tax every year for 30 years.

In February 1983 and $54 million dollar later, Phase I was complete . 14,000 people attended the Grand Opening and The Boston Pops Orchestra played.

In June 1984, the Orange County Board of County Commissioners took up the option for the extra 180,000 m2 paying $2 million for it, and began planning Phase II of the development. In 1986 a state law raised the level of the Tourist Development Tax to 3%. and work on Phase II started in February 1987. This work was finished by January 1989; the center now had an additional adding 150,000 sq ft of exhibition space and an extra 100,000 sq ft of meeting and support space. The month of completion also coincided with another raise in the Tourist Development Tax up to 4%. The Orange County Board of County Commissioners approved another three phases in the development of the OCCCC.

Phase IIA saw another 100,000 sq ft added to the center and was completed in December 1990. This extra space was mainly used for offices. In January 1990 planning for Phase III was underway. In December 1992, it was agreed to drop the word "Civic" from the name of the center so it would simply be called the Orange County Convention Center. In January 1996, Phase III was completed which added a further 383,400 sq ft of exhibition space and cost $219.5 million.In August, Phase IV added anther 367,200 sq ft of exhibition space, and 100,000 sq ft of meeting space and cost $198.7 million. In December of 1997 $32 million was spent on a retrofit of Phase I which added a further 8,200 sq ft of space to the center .

In June 1998, the Orange County Board of County Commissioners approved a further rise in the Tourist Development Tax to 5%. This raised funds for an ambitious Phase V, which would add another 3 million ft of space to the center. In December 1998 , Universal Orlando Resort was paid $69 million for 0.97 km 2 of land across International Drive from the OCCC.

Work on Phase V began in August 2000 after Reed Expositions, agreed to move forty two of their conventions to the Orlando location. Phase V was completed ahead of schedule in September 2003.The first four phases arenow referred to as the "West Building", and Phase V is referred to as the "North/South Building", as it is divided into North and South Exhibition Halls. These halls can be joined to form one large exhibition space or subdivided into four different halls which are known as North A, North B, South A and South B. The North/South Building has over 1.1 million ft of exhibition space. The buildings are connected by an elevated walkway over International Drive.

In 2004, OCCC acted as a staging area for relief operations In the aftermath of Hurricane Charley in 2004 the OCCC worked well as a location to organise the relief effort from. The center was also used for the same purpose after Frances and Jeanne struck too. Even during these times, convention operations continued much as usual, and although it was feared that people would be put off planning their conventions in such a location, business was not affected.

In 2005, a second entrance was added to the rear side of the West Building. In 2006, the Tourist Development Tax was raised again to 6%.

Or perhaps stay at the Marriott Residence Inn Lake Buena Vista which is situated near the convention center and is also centrally situated to key area businesses. After you've finished working you can choose to with the family at some of the fabulous attractions of the area such as Walt Disney World, Universal Studios, Seaworld or Discovery Cove which are all less than 5 miles away from the hotel.

The Residence Inn Marriott at Lake Buena Vista was built in 2001. It has a relaxing Caribbean theme with spacious suites. There is a stunning outdoor waterfall pool and you can take advantage of the complimentary hot breakfast buffet on every day of your stay. and much more. It's a great hotel whether you're in Orlando for business or simply to relax. You'll also find great entertainment, restaurants and shops close by.

The rooms are twice as spacious as most traditional hotel rooms. Studio rooms are large and open plan, with a king sized bed, a full sized bathroom and a living and dining area with a single sofa bed in it. The Orlando family suite has a small bedroom with two youth beds. One bedroom suites have a separate bedroom with either one king sized bed or two queen sized beds, a full sized bathroom and a living and dining area with a single sofa bed. Two bedroom suites have two separate bedrooms, two full bathrooms and a living room with dining area and a single sofa bed. All guest rooms and suites are filled with the latest conveniences, and have a fully equipped kitchen including dishes and glassware, dishwasher, coffee maker, cooking and eating utensils, a refrigerator with ice maker and a microwave. The staff at the Residence Inn Marriott are attentive and will cater to your individual needs. They are efficient and very helpful and are always on call for the requests of all guests.

The JW Marriott Orlando Grande Lakes is located 3.5 miles from the OCCC. This hotel is located on five hundred acres of gorgeous, tropical landscaping. There's a beautiful relaxing spa, several top restaurants and a championship golf course designed by Greg Norman. There's also a tropical lagoon style swimming pool. Great for relaxing after a long day of meetings. The hotel is especially great for business guests, as for a low daily fee you can get access to high speed Internet access as well as unlimited local and long distance telephone calls within the United States. Wi-fi is also available in meeting rooms and public spaces within the hotel. The Ritz Carlton Grande Lakes Resort is also located 3.5 miles from the OCCC. This is a new, ultra-modern sophisticated resort. Every room has high speed internet, multi line phones and network data-ports.There is also a championship golf course in the hotel grounds.


The 3 star Rosen Center is located very conveniently right next to the Convention Center 3 Stars. The Rosen Center features a heated outdoor pool, a full service health club and spa with a salon offering massages skin care treatments. There is a business center located within the Rosen Center too.

The Rosen Plaza Hotel is also close to the OCCC. It is a Mobil 3 star and AAA 3 diamonds hotel. This resort offers great live entertainment in the resort's own nightclub and a variety of dining opportunities With their relaxing rooms and suites, it's a great place to stay and very convenient for the OCCC and the other attractions of the area.

Another hotel close to the OCCC is the twenty seven story Peabody Hotel Orlando, set in stunning landscapes gardens this luxury hotel is known for good service. The hotel is rated Mobil 4 Star and AAA 4 Diamonds. It has also been voted one of the Top 100 Hotels in the US.

A mile away from the OCCC is the Renaissance SeaWorld Orlando Resort which has the most beautiful atrium in it's ten story lobby. If you're bringing the family on your business trip then this hotel is great as it is just over the road from Sea World, yet still close to the OCCC for you. The resort is set in 27 acres and is a AAA 4 Diamond hotel. All rooms offer high-speed Internet access and unlimited calls for a small daily fee.

You can walk to the OCCC from the Embassy Suites Hotel making it ever so convenient for business travelers. This hotel has been awarded AAA 3 Diamonds. The beautiul hotel atrium features waterfalls and a pretty pond.Included in your room price is a full cooked-to-order breakfast and manager's reception every day of your stay.

Courtyard By Marriott Orlando International Drive was purpose built with business travelers in mind. Set just one mile from the OCCC, all guest rooms offer free high speed Internet access,two data port telephones, coffee in the room, and a large work desk with a comfortable chair. You'll also get a free daily paper to keep up with the news. There's a gym and heated outdoor pool with whirlpool.

Another option is the Crowne Plaza Hotel Orlando Universal Studios which is a mile and a half from the OCCC. The hotel is great for both business and leisure and has four hundred deluxe guest rooms, a fitness center, a heated swimming pool with whirlpool and free transportation to area attractions for all guests.

The Crowne Plaza Universal was designed by a team of world-class architects and designers creating a truly unique hotel. The hotel has two areas, the Crowne Wing with a conference center and many guest rooms, and the Atrium Tower with further guest rooms and suites arranged around a fifteen story circular atrium. You'll reach your room in the AtriumTower by highspeed glass elevator. There is a business center available to use too.

AmeriSuites Convention Center is a AAA 3 Diamonds hotel located within walking distance of the OCCC. Another hotel that has been designed specifically for business visitors it features a modern business center a swimming pool and a gym.

Another hotel within walking distance of the OCCC is the Best Western Plaza International a 2 Diamond AAA . MOBIL1 Star hotel. A hotel that is both convenient and affordable.

Doubletree Castle is situated less than a mile away from the OCCC and has been awarded AAA 3 Diamonds. This themed hotel with spires and fountains is stunning to see. The castle theme is continued throughout the hotel. Visit the swimming pool, hot tub, fitness center and two themed restaurants. If you're bringing your kids then they'll love this hotel!

The Embassy Suites Hotel Orlando is located within a mile of the OCCC. It is an AAA 3 Diamonds hotel. It features suites that consist of two rooms and benefits from an outdoor pool, sauna with whirlpool, and a gym.Staying at this hotel brings lots of benefits including a complimentary breakfast every day, free transportation to local attractions and free cocktails for two hours every day.

The Fairfield Inn By Marriott Orlando International Cove is located two miles from the OCCC. This budget hotel has won awards and is considered to be very good value.

The Hampton Inn is within easy walking distance of the OCCC. It is an AAA 3 Diamonds hotel. The hotel has 170 rooms and is wheelchair accessible. There is a gym and an outdoor pool too. Additionally there is a handy meeting room that seats up to fifty and you can hire audio/visual equipment too. You'll get a daily free breakfast if you stay at the Hampton Inn.

Hilton Garden Inn is situated just a mile from the OCCC and is rated Mobil 3 Stars. At this hotel you'll get free high speed Internet and printing. There's also a complimentary business center open twenty four hours a day.

The Holiday Inn & Suites is located within walking distance of the OCCC. The hotel has 115 rooms and 35 suites with kitchens. In every room you'll find a microwave, coffeemaker and refrigerator. You'll also get high speed internet access.There is a pool and a gym, The on site Cafe Largo serves breakfast and dinner.

Homewood Suites are just half a mile from the OCCC and have a 3 diamond AAA Rating.This hotel is within walking distance for all the shops and restaurants of the popular International Drive. There are 252 suites, and a business and conference center offering meeting and banquet facilities.

Residence Inn By Marriott Orlando Convention Center- Orange County Convention Center - 1.5 miles. Residence Inn by Marriott is designed to make you feel at home for a day, a week, a month or more. Our suites give you fifty percent more space than most traditional hotel rooms. The Residence Inn Orlando Convention Center is located adjacent to Pointe Orlando and 1.5 miles from the Orange County Convention Center. The Universal theme parks are two miles away with Epcot Center, Typhoon Lagoon and Walt Disney World eight miles. * All suites feature complimentary high speed Internet access with wireless service available in public areas of the hotel.

The Residence Inn By Marriott can be found 2 miles from the OCCC. The spacious suites offer separate living and sleeping areas and kitchen. This hotel is well located for all the attractions of the area. All guests can enjoy a free breakfast every day.

The 2 AAA diamond Masters Inn is a mile from the OCCC. Offering a relatively cheap level of accomodation for those on a budget.

The Quality Inn Plaza is also situated a mile from the OCCC. You'll find a refrigerator and microwave in your room. At this hotel your children can eat for free at breakfast and dinner buffets as long as they are with a paying adult. There is a free shuttle to some of the local attractions too.

The Sheraton World Resort is just half a mile away from the OCCC. This AAA 3 Diamond resort sits in 28 acres of grounds and is within walking distance of SeaWorld. The hotel has three heated outdoor swimming pools, a fitness center and 55,000 square feet of meeting space.

The Sierra Suites Pointe Orlando is also half a mile from the OCCC. Rooms feature high speed internet access a refrigerator, microwave and coffeemaker. The hotel has 137 studio suites There is a complimentary shuttle service to local attractions too.

Springhill Suites By Marriott is half a mile from the OCCC. This is an economy all-suite hotel with free high speed Internet access representing very good value for money.

When you visit the OCCC you'll definitely want to explore everything the area has to offer in your free time. The center is located in the heart of Downtown Orange County, the area's tourism capital so you won't be surprised to learn that there is plenty to do and see! The center is within easy walking and driving distance of some amazing restaurant and shops, along with all the family attractions the area is renowned for.

The OCCC area is easy to get around. You can choose to walk or cycle, use your own car, or use the public transport system which includes the I-Ride Trolley, The Center also has an Ambassador campaign. Their motto is 'Do it for you. Do it for your community'. The Orange County Convention Center's Community Ambassador Campaign requests volunteers that are members of professional organizations to represent the Orange County Convention Center as honorary Ambassadors.

As an advocate of the OCCC, a Sales Representative from the Center is assigned to each Ambassador and the Ambassador is given promotional material to help promote the OCCC for the organization's future convention.

The local organization benefits from assistance in promoting the local chapter, and boosting the local economy when the center hosts the chapter's state or national convention and there's also plenty of networking opportunities for the association's Ambassador. Every year Richard T. Crotty, Mayor of Orange County, hosts an annual Ambassador's Reception in honor of all the Community Ambassadors.

OCCC employee's do more than just work at the OCCC. Team OCCC Really does make a difference in the local community and further afield, with it's out-reach programme. Through a variety of internal fundraising event , Orange County Convention Center employees contribute annually to the United Way Campaign. Often raising in excess of $50,000 each year. The Orange County Convention Center and Hospitality Partners established a Hospitality Management Scholarship Fund, and OCCC employees serve on staff at the University of Central Florida and its Rosen School of Hospitality Management as Adjunct Professors. The OCCC also sponsors undergraduate interns.T he Center and Service Partners also work with Orange County Public Schools educational institutions by providing Mentors, v isiting Instructors and Advisory Boards, an Academy of Travel Tourism and a Trade Show Internship Program.

The Orange County Convention Center area is constantly growing and changing. Every year over a million visitors attend events held at the OCCC. Because of this there is a constant demand for great accommodation, dining and entertainment.The transportation system and infrastructure of the area is always expanding and being enhanced. This growth has a huge impact on the economy of the area. The Center now benefits from world-wide recognition as one of the premier venues in the convention industry.