New Delhi
28°34′N 77°12′E Largest city Mumbai (Bombay) Official languages Hindi, English + 21 other official languages Government Federal republic - President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam - Prime Minister Manmohan Singh Independence from the UK - Declared 15 August 1947 - Republic 26 January 1950 - Water (%) 9.56 Population - 2005 estimate 1,103,371,000 ( 2nd) - 2001 census 1,027,015,248 - Density 329/km² ( 31st)
852/sq mi GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate - Total $3.633 trillion ( 4th) - Per capita $3,320 ( 122nd) GDP (nominal) 2005 estimate - Total $771,951 million ( 12th) - Per capita $714 ( 134th) HDI (2004) 0.611 (medium) ( 126th) Currency Rupee (₨) ( INR) Time zone IST ( UTC+5:30) - Summer ( DST) not observed ( UTC+5:30) Internet TLD .in Calling code +91 † Includes only Indian-administered territory.


Home to the Indus Valley Civilization and a region of ancient trade routes and vast empires, the Indian subcontinent has a heritage that includes the decimal number system, the Buddhist art of Ajanta, and the Taj Mahal. Four major world religions, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism originated here, while Islam, Christianity, Judaism and Zoroastrianism, arrived in the first millennium CE and shaped India's variegated culture. Colonised by the British East India Company in the 18th century and directly administered by Great Britain starting the mid-19th century, India became a modern nation-state in 1947 after a struggle for independence marked by widespread use of nonviolent resistance as a means of social protest.

With the world's fourth largest economy in purchasing power and the second fastest growing large economy, India has made rapid progress in the last decade, most notably in information technology. A declared nuclear deterrent state, with an active space program, India is considered an emerging superpower. However, although its standard of living is projected to rise sharply in the next half-century, India currently battles high levels of poverty, persistent malnutrition, and environmental degradation. A multi-lingual, multi-ethnic society, India is home to a diversity of wildlife in a variety of protected habitat. The economy of India is the twelfth largest in the world by market exchange rates and the fourth largest in the world by GDP, measured on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis. The country was under socialist-based policies for an entire generation from the 1950s until the 1980s. The economy suffered from extensive regulation, protectionism, and public ownership, leading to pervasive corruption and slow growth. Since 1991, continuing economic liberalization has moved the economy towards a market-based system.

As of 2007, agriculture is the predominant occupation in India, accounting for 60% of employment. The service sector makes up a further 28%, industry around 12%. One estimate is that only one in five job-seekers has had any sort of vocational training.The labor force totals half a billion workers. For output, the agricultural sector accounts for 18% of GDP; the service and industrial sectors make up 54% and 28% respectively. Major agricultural products include rice, wheat, oilseed, cotton, jute, tea, sugarcane, potatoes, cattle, water buffalo, sheep, goats, poultry and fish. Major industries include textiles, chemicals, food processing, steel, transportation equipment, cement, mining, petroleum, machinery and software design. India's GDP is $1.089 trillion, which makes it the twelfth-largest economy in the world or fourth largest by purchasing power adjusted exchange rates. India's nominal per capita income of $977 is ranked 128th in the world. In the late 2000s, India's growth has averaged 7.5% a year, increases which will double the average income within a decade. Unemployment rate is 7.2% (2007 estimate).

Previously a closed economy, India's trade has grown fast. India currently accounts for 1.5% of World trade as of 2007 according to the WTO. According to the World Trade Statistics of the WTO in 2006, India's total merchandise trade (counting exports and imports) was valued at $294 billion in 2006 and India's services trade inclusive of export and import was $143 billion. Thus, India's global economic engagement in 2006 covering both merchandise and services trade was of the order of $437 billion, up by a record 72 percent from a level of $253 billion in 2004. India's trade has reached a still relatively moderate share 24% of GDP in 2006, up from 6% in 1985.

India's recent economic growth has widened economic inequality across the country.Despite sustained high economic growth rate, approximately 80% of its population lives on less than $2 a day (PPP), more than double the same poverty rate in China. Even though the arrival of Green Revolution brought end to famines in India, 40% of children under the age of three are underweight and a third of all men and women suffer from chronic energy deficiency.

Stone Age rock shelters with paintings at Bhimbetka in Madhya Pradesh are the earliest known traces of human life on the Indian subcontinent. The first known permanent settlements appeared over 9,000 years ago, and gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilization, dating back to 3300 BCE. It was followed by the Vedic Civilization which laid the foundations of Hinduism and other cultural aspects of early Indian society. From around 550 BCE, many independent kingdoms and republics known as the Mahajanapadas were established across the country.

The empire built by the Maurya dynasty under Emperor Ashoka united most of modern South Asia except the kingdoms in the south. From 180 BCE, a series of invasions from Central Asia followed including the Indo-Greeks, Indo-Scythians, Indo-Parthians and Kushans in the northwestern Indian Subcontinent. From the third century CE, the Gupta dynasty oversaw the period referred to as ancient India's "Golden Age." While the north had larger, fewer kingdoms, in the south there were several dynasties such as the Chalukyas, Cholas, Pallavas and Pandyas, overlapping in time and space. Science, engineering, art, literature, astronomy, and philosophy flourished under the patronage of these kings. India GDP and Standard of Living are closely related as GDP features among the significant factors in the assessment of the standard of living. Standard of living comprises quality as well as amount of commodities offered for consumption by the citizens and the distribution system. India GDP and Standard of Living Factors: Factors required for the assessment of the standard of living includes:
Rate of poverty
Per capita income and income inequality
Standard of education
Medical facilities
Life expectancy
Social rights
Safety
Environmental condition
Cultural resources
GDP is dependent on a wide variety of factors like:
Private Consumption within the economy
Amount of spending by the central government on final goods and services
Gross imports
Capital Investments like buying of machinery, construction of dams, roads, mines etc.
Gross exports

India GDP and Standard of Living Comparative Analysis: The substantial growth in various sectors like IT, Real Estate, ITES has led to the improvement of the standard of living at a constant rate. However, the statistical figures still delineate that approximately 27.5 % of the Indian population lives below the poverty line. The most significant indicator required to measure the standard of living is in realty per capita purchasing power parity-adjusted gross domestic product. A comparative analysis of the standard of living of India with other countries will aid in the assessment of the position of India in the standard of living chart. The per capita- adjusted gross domestic product of China in the year 2003 was $4,900 and that of the majority of western European countries is $26,000 and that of the most developed country like US is $33,000. The per capita- adjusted gross domestic product of India has been calculated to be US $ 31,00 Measurement of India GDP and Standard of Living: GDP makes an assessment of India's national output by dividing the current GDP of India with the total population of the country. In the examination of overall production, GDP takes into account both the public as well as the private consumption accompanied with the manufacture of capital goods that consequently aid in the further production of commodities. Alternative to India GDP and Standard of Living: A recent innovation in the field of India GDP and Standard of Living can be used in place of per capita GDP in order to examine India's present material well -being. Subtracting military expenditures from the total consumption in order to identify the standard of living will do this. This new measure has substantially reduced the difference in material well being of the Indian citizens when compared with that of the foreign countries.

The Partition of India was the partition by the Indian Independence Act 1947 of British India, including the dissolution of the British Indian Empire, which led to the creation, on August 14, 1947 and August 15, 1947, respectively, of the sovereign states of the Dominion of Pakistan (later Islamic Republic of Pakistan and People's Republic of Bangladesh) and the Union of India (later Republic of India). Partition included the geographical division of the Bengal province of British India into East Pakistan and West Bengal (India), and the similar partition of the Punjab province into Punjab (West Pakistan) and Punjab (India), and also the division of other assets, including the British Indian Army, the Indian Civil Service and other administrative services, the Indian railways, and the central treasury.

In the aftermath of Partition, the princely states of India, which had been left by the Indian Independence Act 1947 to choose whether to accede to India or Pakistan or to remain outside them, were all incorporated into one or other of the new dominions. The question of the choice to be made in this connection by Jammu and Kashmir led to the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 and other wars and conflicts between India and Pakistan.

The secession of Bangladesh from Pakistan in 1971 is not covered by the term Partition of India, nor is the earlier separation of Burma from the administration of British India, or the even earlier separation of Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). Ceylon, part of the Madras Presidency of British India from 1795 until 1798, became a separate Crown Colony in 1798. Burma, gradually annexed by the British during 182686 and governed as a part of the British Indian administration until 1937, was directly administered thereafter. Burma was granted independence on January 4, 1948 and Ceylon on February 4, 1948. (See History of Sri Lanka and History of Burma) The Kingdom of Sikkim was established as a princely state after the Anglo-Sikkimese Treaty of 1861, however, the issue of sovereignty was left undefined. In 1947, Sikkim became an independent kingdom under the suzerainty of India and remained so until 1975 when it was absorbed into India as the 22nd state.

People and Population. About 16 per cent of all the world's people live in India. Only China, which has a population of more than one billion, has more people than India. India is more densely populated than most other countries.
Vital statistics: Population ('99 UN est.) : 998.1 million Population (2025-projection) : 1,330.2 million Sex ratio (female/1000 males) : 927 About 73 per cent of India's people live in rural areas. Most of the country's 557,000 farm villages have less than 1,000 people. About 27 per cent of the people live in urban areas. India has about 4,000 cities and towns. About 300 cities have populations over 100,000. Six cities have more than 3 million people. These cities, in order of population size, are Mumbai (Bombay), Delhi, Calcutta, Bangalore, Chennai (Madras), and Hyderabad. Calcutta, the capital city of West Bengal, has the greatest population density of any city in India, with an average of about 42,000 people per square kilometre.

Since the early 1900's, India's population has grown by several million a year. During the 1980's and 1990's, the population increased by as much as 18 million per year. The main reason for this "population explosion" is that improved sanitation and health care have caused the death rate to fall more rapidly than the birth rate. Population growth has led to serious overcrowding. India's city population grows about twice as fast as the population of the country as a whole.

Ancestry . India's people belong to a variety of ethnic groups. The two largest groups are the light-skinned Indo-Aryans and the dark-skinned Dravidians. Most Indo-Aryans live in northern India, and a majority of the Dravidians live in southern parts of the country.

The Dravidians were among India's earliest known inhabitants. About 2500 B.C., they created an advanced civilization in the Indus Valley. About 1500 B.C., the Aryans invaded the Indus Valley and drove the Dravidians south.

Beginning about A.D. 1000, central Asian Islamic peoples, mainly from the area that is now Afghanistan and Iran, settled in India. Many of their descendants live in the northeast, especially in the statesof Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal. Mongoloid peoples live in the Himalayan region along India's northeastern border and in the states that border Burma. Most members of such minority groups as the Bhils, Gonds, Khasis, Nagas, Oraons, and Santals live in remote hills and forests.

The remaining countries of present-day South Asia are Nepal, Bhutan, and the Maldives. The first two, Nepal and Bhutan, having signed treaties with the British designating them as independent states, were never a part of British India, and therefore their borders were not affected by the partition. The Maldives, which became a protectorate of the British crown in 1887 and gained its independence in 1965, was also unaffected by the partition.

Partition was accompanied by one of the largest and most rapid population transfers in history, with 17.9 million people leaving their homes. Of these, only 14.5 million arrived, suggesting that 3.4 million went "missing". Nightlife in India When it comes time to Indian nightlife, the palm-fringed shores of Goa are usually at the forefront of peoples' minds. However, a surprisingly vibrant nightlife can be found all over the country if you know where to look. Take in a live performance or party until after the sun comes up! An Overview of Nightlife in India
Nightlife in India is diverse and growing. Tucked away, you'll find everything from intimate bars and pubs, to multi-level nightclubs. Those interested in something more traditional will find no shortage of cultural performances either. Top 5 Indian Beer Brands
The Indian beer industry is booming, and a visit to India wouldn't be complete without trying some of the top Indian beers on offer. Top 5 Live Music Venues in Mumbai
Live music has really caught on in Mumbai, with many people now preferring to go out and listen to a live band than a DJ. Visit any of these popular Mumbai live music venues and you won't be disappointed. 6 Unforgettable Mumbai Bars
From the romantic to the incredibly sophisticated, Mumbai has some world class bars that will leave you with memories of an unforgettable night out. To see Mumbai for a different perspective, treat yourself to an experience at one of these atmospheric Mumbai bars. Many of them offer fine dining as well. 6 Places to Find the Best Kolkata Nightlife
Once readily associated with slums and poverty, Kolkata has come of age to be the cultural capital of India. It's abundant in music, art, dance, and drama. Also unlike some other large Indian cities, there are no curfews in Kolkata, ensuring a surprisingly thriving nightlife. Top 5 Casinos in Goa
Goa is the only state in India where gambling is legal. The industry is still emerging but casinos can be found scattered across many of the five star hotels. Try your luck at these top five casinos in Goa. Review of Loungefly Baga Beach Goa
Loungefly at Baga Beach Goa isn't your average Indian bar -- it's chic and cosmopolitan, and is one of the few places in Goa where you can party until dawn. Review of Blue Frog Mumbai
The acoustically designed Blue Frog gives new meaning to live music, with acts that cut across all genres. It's without a doubt Mumbai's best live music venue. However, with popularity comes crowds and a long wait to get drinks at the bar. Review of Dragonfly Bar & Lounge Mumbai
Dragonfly is the newest addition to the Mumbai bar scene, and it's hot and sexy -- right down to the provocative wallpaper in the VIP area. Come late in the week if you want to dance and you won't be disappointed! Review of Poly Esther's Nightclub Mumbai
Retro fans who love music from the 70s and 80s will appreciate this nightclub. However, be prepared for it to be crowded and high-spirited.

For almost all Indians the family is the most important social unit. There is a strong preference for extended families, consisting of two or more married couples (often of more than a single generation), who share finances and a common kitchen. Marriage is virtually universal, divorce rare, and virtually every marriage produces children. Almost all marriages are arranged by family elders on the basis of caste, degree of consanguinity, economic status, education (if any), and astrology. A bride traditionally moves to her husband's house. However, nonarranged "love marriages" are increasingly common in cities.

Within families, there is a clear order of social precedence and influence based on gender, age, and, in the case of a woman, the number of her male children. The senior male of the household "whether father, grandfather, or uncle" typically is the recognized family head, and his wife is the person who regulates the tasks assigned to female family members. Males enjoy higher status than females; boys are often pampered while girls are relatively neglected. This is reflected in significantly different rates of mortality and morbidity between the sexes, allegedly (though reliable statistics are lacking) in occasional female infanticide, and increasingly in the abortion of female fetuses following prenatal gender testing. This pattern of preference is largely connected to the institution of dowry, since the family's obligation to provide a suitable dowry to the bride's new family represents a major financial liability.

Traditionally, women were expected to treat their husbands as if they were gods, and obedience of wives to husbands has remained a strong social norm. This expectation of devotion may follow a husband to the grave; within some caste groups, widows are not allowed to remarry even if they are bereaved at a young age.

Hindu marriage has traditionally been viewed as the "gift of a maiden" (kanyadan) from the bride's father to the household of the groom. This gift is also accompanied by a dowry, which generally consists of items suitable to start a young couple in married life. In some cases, however, dowries demanded by grooms and their families have become quite extravagant, and some families appear to regard them as means of enrichment. There are instances, a few of which have been highly publicized, wherein young brides have been treated abusively even tortured and murdered in an effort to extract more wealth from the bride's father. The "dowry deaths" of such young women have contributed to a reaction against the dowry in some modern urban families.

Virtually all regions of India have their distinctive places of pilgrimage, local saints and folk heroes, religious festivals, and associated fairs. There are also innumerable festivals associated with individual villages or temples or with specific castes and cults.

The most popular of the religious festivals celebrated over the greater part of India are Vasantpanchami (generally in February, the exact date determined by the Hindu lunar calendar), in honour of Sarasvati, the goddess of learning; Holi (February-March), a time when traditional hierarchical relationships are forgotten and celebrants throw coloured water and powder at one another; Dussehra (September-October), when the story of the Ramayana is reenacted; and Diwali (Divali; October-November), a time for lighting lamps and exchanging gifts. The major secular holidays are Independence Day (August 15) and Republic Day (January 26).

A Muslim marriage is considered to be a contractual relationship contracted by the bride's father or guardian and, though there are often dowries, there is formal reciprocity, in which the groom promises a mahr, a commitment to provide his bride with wealth in her lifetime.


As of 2005, 85.7% of the population lives on less than $2.50 (PPP) a day, down from 92.5% in 1981. This compares with 80.5% in Sub-Saharan Africa. 75.6% of the population lives on less than $2 a day (PPP), which is around 20 rupees or $0.5 a day in nominal terms. It was down from 86.6% and compares with 73.0% in Sub-Saharan Africa. A 24.3% of the population earned less than $1 (PPP, around $0.25 in nominal terms) a day in 2005, down from 42.1% in 1981. 41.6% of its population is living below the new international poverty line of $1.25 (PPP) per day, down from 59.8% in 1981. The World Bank further estimates that a third of the global poor now reside in India.Income inequality in India (Gini coefficient: 32.5 in year 1999- 2000) is increasing. On the other hand, the Planning Commission of India uses its own criteria and has estimated that 27.5% of the population was living below the poverty line in 2004 2005, down from 51.3% in 1977 1978, and 36% in 1993-1994. The source for this was the 61st round of the National Sample Survey (NSS) and the criterion used was monthly per capita consumption expenditure below Rs. 356.35 for rural areas and Rs. 538.60 for urban areas. 75% of the poor are in rural areas, most of them are daily wagers, self-employed householders and landless labourers.

Although Indian economy has grown steadily over the last two decades, its growth has been uneven when comparing different social groups, economic groups, geographic regions, and rural and urban areas. Between 1999 and 2008, the annualized growth rates for Gujarat (8.8%), Haryana (8.7%), or Delhi (7.4%) were much higher than for Bihar (5.1%), Uttar Pradesh (4.4%), or Madhya Pradesh (3.5%). Poverty rates in rural Orissa (43%) and rural Bihar (41%) are among the world's most extreme.

India has a higher rate of malnutrition among children under the age of three (46% in year 2007) than any other country in the world.

Despite significant economic progress, 1/4 of the nation's population earns less than the government-specified poverty threshold of $0.40/day. Official figures estimate that 27.5% of Indians lived below the national poverty line in 2004-2005. A 2007 report by the state-run National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) found that 25% of Indians, or 236 million people, lived on less than 20 rupees per day with most working in "informal labour sector with no job or social security, living in abject poverty."

Beyond the family the most important unit is the caste. Within a village all members of a single caste recognize a fictive kinship relation and a sense of mutual obligation, but ideas of fictive kinship extend also to the village as a whole. Thus, for example, a woman who marries and goes to another village never ceases to be regarded as a daughter of her village. If she is badly treated in her husband's village, it may become a matter of collective concern for her natal village, not merely for those of her own caste.