Part-time View


Part-time employees are important additions to most industries, especially those who are working in shifts. Part-time employees will always be favorable to employers because they can have tasks that can be completed for less than what employers would pay to a full-time worker and often without paying benefits or other advantages. Part-time employees are mainly high school students, college students, mothers, people with secondary employment, and senior citizens who don't have the time to keep a full-time job. These workers contribute substantially to their industry by filling in when necessary.

Jobs that employ part-time workers include retail stores, grocery stores, administrative offices, doctor's offices, seasonal employers such as resorts or landscapers, and some large corporations.

Graduate Assistantship & Internship Positions The CCSU Learning Center is engaged in innovative approaches to academic support with the cooperation of both Academic Affairs and Student Affairs.
The main focus of the two-year internship is to train and develop young professionals who will positively contribute to the field of Student Affairs.

Graduate Internship:

Position: Graduate Internship for students enrolled in the Student Development in Higher Education graduate program . Terms: 12 months - Full Time
Compensation: $18,000 per year, course fees waiver, insurance (if needed)

Qualifications: Students should have Bachelors Degree with a minimum 2.70 GPA (on a 4.0 scale) and an application on file for acceptance in the CCSU Student Development in Higher Education graduate program. Experience in a tutorial and/or learning center, advising center, mentor program, or as a teacher or teaching assistant and has the ability to organize and work independently with strong communication skills, solid academic background, and a strong commitment to student development in higher education.is of advantage and desired.

WORK SCOPE


During the first year of the Internship, the incumbent will: Provide direct academic support service to students Assist in the development and delivery of training programs for undergraduates. Coordinate and present special programs, workshops and presentations offered through The Learning Center Facilitate the transition of students with disabilities from their previous academic environment to CCSU Administer Placement testing As for the second year intern, work's scope and level increases. In addition, the second year Intern will: Provide mentorship for the first year Intern and conduct program evaluation and assessment Represent TLC on campus wide committees Create and update web services and information Assist to develop and implement improvements to all services and programs Participate in the hiring, training and supervision of TLC staff.

To apply: Send resume and letter of interest to Meg Leake via e-mail leake@ccsu.edu or mail to The Learning Center, 1615 Stanley Street, New Britain, CT 06050 Visit www.ccsu.edu/learnctr for more information-The Learning Center.


Accounting Jobs (CT)

The accounting industry is controlled by the Big Four:
Price Waterhouse, KPMG,
Ernst & Young LLP,
and Deloitte & Touche

Accounting is a popular choice for people looking to switch careers. One way to secure a job after graduation is through an internship because it will get your foot in the door with an employer and it will also show your professional experience to prospective employers.

You don't have to be with a firm to be an accountant because Accountants can work within public industry such as a business consultant, auditor, financial planner, or tax adviser and for government agencies. Corporate accountants can work in financial management, financial reporting, budget analysis, or internal auditing for different companies.


STAMFORD, CT
Support Team Lead UBS Financial Services Inc. & Global Application Support Analyst UBS Financial Services Inc.

The SDU O&L IT Production Services Team is responsible for the support of the Global Cash Utility, Global Messaging & Screening services and Global Client Infrastructure services applications and its infrastructure (a mix of Mainframe, Windows and Unix platforms) globally. This Global Applications Support will span across the regions of Europe, US, and Asia. Manager, Compensation & Benefits Analysis Purdue Pharma (CT-Stamford, CT) Data Analyst - Wilton, CT Connolly Consulting Associates (CT-Stamford, CT)

Summary: Our growing internal data services team in Wilton Connecticut is looking for experienced, bright, highly motivated, and creative Data Analyst to support our audit efforts for some of the largest, best run companies in the world. Senior Data Analyst - Wilton,CT Connolly Consulting Associates(CT-Stamford, CT) Experienced Actuarial Student-Norwalk, CT Hewitt Consulting (CT-Stamford, CT)

For over 65 years, Hewitt has been helping leading companies around the world. We've earned our reputation for HR excellence through the thought leadership of Hewitt Consulting and the administrative leadership of Human Resources Outsourcing. A dvanced Actuarial Student - Norwalk, CT Hewitt Consulting (CT-Stamford, CT) Financial Advisor For FORTUNE Magazine's No. 2 Best Company To Work For Edward Jones (CT-Stamford, CT)

People from different occupational backgrounds including sales people, I.T. professionals, military veterans, and corporate managers have found new success Edward Jones Company. Purchasing, Procurement And Supply Opportunities U.S. Navy (CT-Stamford, CT)

The purchasing and supply community provides the organization and availability of materials and resources to help each mission run successfully and safely. Accounting Manager Needed Spherion (CT-Stamford, CT)

This $6.6 Billion company is a leading global provider of integrated information-based solutions to businesses and professional customers. They provide value-added information, with software tools and applications that help its customers make better decisions, faster.
Data Analyst - Wilton, CT Connolly Consulting Associates(CT-Stamford, CT)

Summary: Our growing internal data services team in Wilton Connecticut is looking for experienced, bright, highly motivated, and creative Data Analyst to support our audit efforts for some of the largest, best run companies in the world. Senior Data Analyst - Wilton,CT Connolly Consulting Associates(CT-Stamford, CT) Financial Services Industries Tax Manager - Hedge Funds - Stamford, CT Deloitte(CT-Stamford, CT) International Tax Senior, Stamford, CT Deloitte(CT-Stamford, CT)

There is a tax implication for almost every transaction a company undertakes, from trading to acquisition to offshoring. Even the most sophisticated global companies often struggle with balancing compliance details and long-term tax strategy.
Financial Services Industries Tax - Hedge Funds - Senior Manager, Stamford, CT Deloitte(CT-Stamford, CT)


Fund Accounting Manager/Director Hartford, CTGlobeOp Financial Services(Hartford, CT)

We are looking for a Fund Accounting Manager/Director for our Hartford, CT location. Job Include: Managing and monitoring the timing and quality of client deliverables and providing technical accounting/industry knowledge to our clients. TECHNICAL CONSULTANT - COBOL/DB2 In MVS ENVIRONMENT, HARTFORD, CTAig - Hsb(Hartford, CT)

Regular Location: CT-Hartford Education: Bachelors Experience: 6-9 years Description: The Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company has an exciting opportunity within our team for an experienced Technical Specialist located in our Hartford, CT office.
Accounting/Finance Manager - CTUnitedHealth Group(Hartford, CT)

UnitedHealth Group is an innovative leader in the health and well-being industry, serving more than 55 million Americans. Through our family of companies, we contribute outstanding clinical insight with consumer-friendly services and advanced technology to help people achieve optimal health.
Operations Senior Manager- Groton, CTCsc(Southeast/New London, CT)

Description Job Summary: The Platform Services Center is organized to design, deploy, and deliver the full lifecycle of services in the Platform Services arena. Financial Services Specialist Pitney Bowes Shelton,CT
Senior / Lead Technician STORY BROS., INC New Britain,CT
Account Manager American Red Cross Farmington,CT
Mortgage Loan Closer Kforce OnStaff Group Farmington,CT
Mortgage Closer Adecco Farmington,CT
Auto Assistant Shop Manager Danbury,CT
Automotive Master Technician Midas Danbury,CT
Oil Delivery Driver Safety-Kleen Systems, Inc. Portland,CT
Baby Photographer / Sales Representative Our365 Hartford,CT
Oil Delivery Driver Safety-Kleen Systems, Inc. Portland,CT
On-Call Benefits Counselor Unum Hartford,CT
Financial Advisor / Financial Sales Waddell & Reed Hamden,CT
Direct Sales Supervisor Comcast Cable Berlin,CT
Sales Engineer, CT Reitman Personnel Services Hartford,CT
Retail Automotive Store Manager Monro™ Muffler/Brake & Service New Britain/Southington/Wallingford,CT
Retail Automotive Store Manager Monro™ Muffler/Brake & Service Old Saybrook/New London/Norwich,CT
Retail Automotive Store Manager Monro™ Muffler/Brake & Service East Haven/Middletown/Cheshire,CT
Sales Champion Window Greater Hartford,CT
Outside Sales - Thermoforming - Contract Packaging CyberCoders Kensington,CT
Mechanical Drafter/Design (inventor and autocad) The Davis Companies Windsor,CT
Automotive Technician Wallingford Tire & Auto Wallingford,CT
Home Furnishing Consultant Raymour & Flanigan Hartford,CT
Store Manager RadioShack Trumbull,CT
Entry level management/Sales/Customer Service NOBECK Marketing Rocky Hill,CT
Investment Consultant / Sales in Stamford & W Hartford Volt New Haven,CT
Account Executive II Automotive Online Sales Hartford Courant Hartford,CT
Mortgage Consultant M & G Mortgage Services, Inc. West Hartford,CT
Pharmaceutical Sales Representative Hartford,CT
Agent Sales Opportunity InterCall Hartford,CT
Manufacturer/Industrial Sales Representative New Haven,CT
Manufacturer/Industrial Sales Representative Hartford,CT
OUTSIDE SALES REPRESENTATIVE Superior Lamp New Milford,CT
OUTSIDE SALES REPRESENTATIVE Superior Lamp Stratford,CT

Engineering Jobs (CT) CT Job Tip

Engineers cover the following territory: agricultural, aerospace, biomedical, chemical, civil, computer hardware, electrical, electronics, environmental, health and safety, industrial, marine, materials, mechanical, mining and geological, nuclear, and petroleum. Employment will grow about as fast as average for engineering jobs through 2014, with some variance within specialties. The two top specialties in which employment will grow faster than average are biomedical and environmental. Product Manager D&D Associates (CT-Stamford, CT)

A leading financial software company in Norwalk, CT is looking for an experienced software Product Manager. You will work with engineering on new product development as well as enhance existing products. You will be responsible for the product life cycle, including gathering requirements, creating design concepts, and working with engineering to implement and launch the product.
Engineering Manager Lex Products Corp. (CT-Stamford, CT)

Lex Products designs and manufactures multi-level electrical power distribution and control systems for the commercial and military markets, especially those with unique requirements like rough use, extreme climates, and high amounts of power load balancing. We are currently seeking a process-driven leader to head up its product development, custom product, technical support, and research and development. Engineering Opportunities U.S. Navy (CT-Stamford, CT)

The U.S. Navy is not just the world's preeminent sea power rather one of the largest employers of engineers, both nuclear and civil. Navy Engineers enjoy exceptional professional benefits that are hard to find in the private sector.
US Navy Officer Career Opportunities U.S. Navy (CT-Stamford, CT)

If you're a student or graduate of a four-year college or university with leadership skills and determination, now's the perfect time to look into a career as a Navy Officer. Here, you can get comprehensive training that sets you apart and follows you wherever you go. Customer Service - Inside Sales E08119Alstom US (Hartford, CT)

Alstom Power Inc., a world leader in the supply of power generation services and equipment, is seeking an energetic and assertive individual to support our customer service team in this entry-level position within our Power Service Boiler Parts organization. Basic Requirements: A Bachelors degree in marketing, communications or technical field or a trade-school diploma. Software Engineer - Bristol, CT EDGE Services, Inc (Hartford, CT)

EDGE Services Inc. has specialized in the development, implementation and integration of banking and financial software since 1993. Backed by an on time and on budget industry track record, EDGE provides project managers, technicians, systems analysts, business analysts and testers with industry and application expertise.
Team center System Administrator - East Hartford, CT. Csc (Hartford, CT)

Job Title: Team center System Administrator - East Hartford, CT. CONNECTICUT-EAST HARTFORD Schedule: Full-time Job Type : Standard Employee Status: Regular Travel: Yes, 25% of the time Job Description : Essential Job Functions Develops the technical solution that meets the requirements of the project. MECHANICAL ENGINEERING TECH / US / CT / E Hartford Northrop Grumman Space Tech (Hartford, CT)

Join the men and women of Northrop Grumman Space Technology in meeting the largest, most complex systems challenges imaginable for government, military and business. Description: Support design, fabrication, assembly and test of precision mechanical devices under limited supervision of an engineer or scientist.
IT Quality Analyst - Automation Testing - Minnetonka, MN, Phoenix, AZ, Hartford, CT UnitedHealth Group (Hartford, CT)

UnitedHealth Group is an innovative leader in the health and well-being industry, serving more than 55 million Americans. Through our family of companies, we contribute outstanding clinical insight with consumer-friendly services and advanced technology to help people achieve optimal health.
Supplier Quality Engineer - CT Raytheon (Danbury/Bridgeport, CT)

This is a temporary position for a minimum period of 3 - 4 months as a Regional Supplier Quality Engineer. This is a home office based position, covering a regional area within a 200 mile radius. Some longer distance and overnight travel may be required. Job Duties: A Supplier Quality Manager position in a high paced Military aerospace environment.
Field Account Rep For Pumps - MUST LIVE IN RI, MA OR CTExpress Employment (Providence, RI)

We are seeking for a sales professional with at least five years experience in selling industrial rotative machinery, preferably pumps . A leader in the power/machinery industry is seeking a motivated and experienced sales account person to maintain, acquire and develop accounts for sales of PUMPS in the Rhode Island, Connecticut and Massachusetts market.
Senior Engineering Finance SpecialistThe Rosen Group(New Haven, CT)

A Senior Engineering Specialist to provide financial analysis in labor estimating. This is a unique opportunity to join one of the premier companies in the World. You will have the immediate chance to have high visibility with executive management and to make an impact on the companies expanding operations in CT.
Facilities Operations Manager I - West Haven, CTJohnson Controls - Controls (New Haven, CT)

Johnson Controls is a world class employer where ingenuity and excellence are welcome. We are a global market leader in automotive experience, building efficiency and power solutions with over 140,000 employees in 125 countries. For over a century, Johnson Controls has been working to find new ways to improve the places where people live, work and travel. Development Scientist I- Ph.D. Required, Upstream Development-Cheshire, CTAlexion Pharmaceuticals (New Haven, CT)

A position for a Development Scientist I is available in our Fermentation and Cell Culture Development group. The responsibilities of this position include: 1) Develop and evaluate next-generation commercial bioreactor processes to successfully transfer processes to pilot and manufacturing scales 2) Improve existing platform bioreactor processes for GS derived NS0 and CHO cell lines Engineering OpportunitiesU.S. Navy (Los Angeles, CA)

Operate and develop some of the world's most sensitive and classified nuclear technology. Or take your civil engineering career a quantum leap forward. Only in the Navy.
Part Time Jobs (CT) Chargeback Assistant (P/T)Purdue Pharma (CT-Stamford, CT)

Description: The part-time Chargeback Assistant will be responsible for handling medical/surgical dealer chargeback submissions from receipt to close which includes editing and processing the initial submissions, review and process eligible resubmissions, review and distributes reconciliation reports, communicate with medical/surgical dealers on membership and chargeback issues. Service Associates/CashiersWalmart (CT-Stamford, CT)

Whether you're interested in full-time or part-time opportunities, you'll discover more than a job at Walmart. Experience plenty of advancement opportunities and enjoy the perks of working for the worlds largest retailer.
Web Analyst - WinZip.com Corel Corporation(CT-Stamford, CT)

With more than 185 million downloads worldwide, WinZip is one of the most popular software utilities. Over the last fifteen years, they've built a reputation for being THE file compression utility for Windows. Corel is one of the worlds top software companies with over 100 million active users in over 75 countries.
Physician Opportunities U.S. Navy(CT-Stamford, CT)

As a Navy Physician, you can pursue your true passion for helping others. Heal patients while taking part in a noble cause; focus on the finer points of medicine without the financial and business complications of private practice holding you back.
Ministry Opportunities U.S. Navy (CT-Stamford, CT)

You can bring spiritual guidance to heroes in uniform as a Chaplain and Officer. Answering the needs of the Sailors, Marines, and Coast Guard members who are out there following a higher calling of their own.
Legal Opportunities U.S. Navy (CT-Stamford, CT)

In the Navy Judge Advocate Generals (JAG) Corps, you'll find an opportunity that's about as exclusive as it gets. The chance to be both a great lawyer and a Navy Officer and be compensated generously. And positioned to not only make your mark but to make a difference in the world.
Intelligence Opportunities U.S. Navy (CT-Stamford, CT)

Your objectives are Cracking codes, tracking threats and analyzing intel, presenting briefs, planning reconnaissance and operating satellite telecom systems. Intelligence Specialists in the Navy Reserve lead essential efforts behind the scenes that are critical to our national security and the safety of those who protect it.
Journalism, Design And Photography Opportunities U.S. Navy (CT-Stamford, CT)

You have to Capture images and events,write stories and profiles, Hone technical production skills, and Go behind the scenes to educate military personnel and the public about activities and accomplishments that go on every day in the Navy.
Sr Solumina Mfg Developer - East Hartford, CTCsc (Hartford, CT)

Job Title: Sr Solumina Mfg Developer - East Hartford, Job Category: Applications Primary Location: USA-CT: CONNECTICUT-EAST HARTFORD Schedule: Full-time J ob Type: Standard Employee Status : Regular Travel: No Description : Essential Job Functions such Coding, testing, debugging, implementing, and documenting highly complex programs.
RSW - SALES CONSULTANT - Enfield, CT The Home Depot (Hartford, CT)

Position Title: RSW - SALES CONSULTANT - Enfield, CT Working Location: CT - Enfield Employment Status: Full-Time Required Experience: 1+ years Required Education: HS Diploma/GED Travel Required: 0-25% Job Description: The Home Depot, Home Services, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of The Home Depot, provides in home sales and service.

