For memory to properly function, information must be correctly received through the senses. Memory is stored (encoded) according to many different themes. It is stored according to time (when something happened), category (animal, plant, mineral), function (a hammer is used to pound nails), and many others. These different types of memory represent individual memory systems within the brain. .Once information is stored correctly within one or more of these systems it can later be retrieved. The ease and accuracy of retrieval depends upon the effectiveness of the initial encoding. Retrieval is also dependent upon what file you consciously decide to file newly learned information under. In other words, you can choose which file in your mind to store a particular memory in. You can even decide to place a memory in a folder that already exists.
Once we come in contact with information to be remembered our brains develop a "code," which becomes a record of the experience. Our memory can be affected at this stage if the information is not coded in a way that makes it easy to recall when needed. For example, we may recognize someone in the office where we work, but outside of that environment we may have difficulty in recognizing him or her. This is because the face was coded in association with work and outside of that coding strategy the memory is not recognizable. We lose the context of the memory that is guided by our semantic memory system. This is the ability to hold and effectively store a memory. Rehearsal is one of the most important factors involved in retaining the information that we've been exposed to. Problems in this stage of memory often occur due to a lack of rehearsal. This refers to the ability to recall the memory needed. Once the information is successfully stored, it must be retrievable in order to be useful. For information to be retrieved, it first must be stored effectively. Once effectively stored, cues and reminders can help us then retrieve the information. Remembering that you need to pick up milk before coming home can easily be forgotten as you go through your daily routine. As you drive home and see a convenience store your memory is jogged and you remember the errand. Often it seems as if we have forgotten something even though it was successfully stored. We simply need help in retrieving the memory; we have to remember to recall.
In this next section, we will outline the five systems of memory. These include working memory, semantic memory, episodic memory, procedural memory, and perceptual memory. Remember, according to our model these different systems work together and function according to time and purpose.


Working memory (which could also be called "memory for now") contains all that we are conscious of and working on right now. Information is held long enough to make a decision and then either is lost or sent on to storage for later use. If it's transferred to form a memory for later use, it becomes long-term memory. Information that you are thinking about right now (reading about working memory) includes data currently entering your senses, as well as related memories associated from long-term memory stores that help you make sense of what you're reading. Working memory (also called short-term memory) is transient in nature and, unless processed and stored in long-term memory, will be lost after it is used. The phase in which working or short-term memory is transferred into long-term memory is called memory consolidation. This storage function allows us to bring information online for comparisons to other information contained in long-term memory, thereby enhancing problem solving and comprehension. Other terms associated with working memory include immediate memory, active memory, and primary memory.

Working memory has three major subsystems that work in unison . These are the central executive, the visuo-spatial sketchpad, and the phonological loop. The central executive serves to regulate and manage information contained in working memory. It also serves to regulate and interact with functions of long-term memory. The visuo-spatial sketchpad regulates visual and spatial information and processes this information for immediate use. Finally, the phonological loop translates information into verbal code and is central in allowing us to read, converse, and transfer our world into verbal representations. It is our verbal information processor or our mind's "ear."

involves the recall of information in the same or similar place or situation as when the memory was formed. The theory of context-dependent memory asserts that memories will be more easily recalled if you are within the same context as when the memory was established. Have you ever walked into a room and forgot what you went in there for? Frequently you will have to go back to where you started from to remember what you were doing. This is an example of context dependent memory, which can be used to your advantage. If you find that you can't remember something, go back to where the memory was formed. If that is not possible, try to create similar feelings or sensations to those that initially surrounded the encoding of the information. You may find that the information you are trying to remember will be much more accessible.

This is what most people call "memory" and it can be also considered "memory for later." It is the stored, permanent information that we have committed to memory to be retrieved for later use. This is the area where we notice a lapse when we have a name on the tip of our tongue and can't seem to get it out. Long-term memory is made up of both semantic and episodic memory . Long-term memory is not actually a system of memory per se, but rather an abstract term used to globally denote more permanently stored information.

Semantic Memory:
Semantic memory includes all of the general information that we have accumulated in our long-term memories that is not linked by time or place. It involves data related to who, what, and why.

Episodic Memory:
This system is in charge of the information associated with the time and place at which you learned the information and formed the memory. This is the system that is utilized in the preceding memory tip on context-dependent memory. The episodic memory acts as the memory for when and where. For example, remembering that you had a salad for dinner last night is an episodic memory (when). Remembering that lettuce is a plant that matures through the process of photosynthesis is a semantic memory (who, what, or why).

The procedural system stores information on how to do something (like how to change the spark plugs in your car, what tools to use, which way to turn the spark plugs in order to remove them, and how much pressure to apply for optimal performance). Procedural memory holds our knowledge about our skills and habits. This knowledge base represents our life's work. It is the information that was acquired slowly through continued practice. Think of someone on television who has portrayed an amnesic. If portrayed accurately, the person lost the memory of who he or she is (explicit memory), not the memory of how to do things (procedural memory). The person has no recollection of any personal history, but can still change a spark plug, if the knowledge was previously learned. The differences between these two components of long-term memory, illustrated by the amnesic who has no memory of personal events but maintains knowledge of procedural artifacts, highlights the complexity and dynamic nature of memory functioning.

Perceptual memory serves to identify objects and the structure of language. It is also a knowledge base for evaluating overall patterns of larger groups of data. It provides the context for the content of memory and is intuitive in nature, not involving the conceptual or comparative logic utilized in other memory systems. It sees the forest and not the individual trees. The perceptual memory system is the system that allows people to be "geniuses" or gifted artists or musicians. Through this memory system, we recognize themes and are able to use intuition in order to process larger patterns of data. There are separate systems within the perceptual memory system that mediate visual and auditory information.

The perceptual memory defines a musician, a world-class chef, or even a skilled mechanic. They have built up a large knowledge base of complex patterns related to their expertise and can thus process the information using these patterns. They become intuitive in processing these patterns and can predict where the pattern is heading. Recognizing your strengths can greatly enhance your memory functioning. You will be processing the same amount of information in your working memory, but the information processed will be in chunks rather than individual bits. If you can process the information in patterns, you can process more information quicker and more efficiently. This is the optimal use of perceptual memory.


The importance of paying attention to detail cannot be overemphasized. If we become bogged down with too much information and preoccupied with the stress of our daily routine it becomes increasingly more difficult to remember the things we need for later. That's why relaxation is such an important component for effective memory. It is much more difficult to remember things if we add an emotional component of anxiety or depression. Also, it's important to use any tricks or tools that seem to help you.


Remember Your Senses:

Your senses are the first step in storing a memory. If your senses are not appropriately picking up information to begin with, there is no way that you can form a memory. Your senses are mediated by your attentional capacity (how well you can pay attention). When you're attending to information, your senses are alert and receptive to environmental information. If you're inattentive, your senses are not picking up this information. As an example, if you're not attending visually (your eyes are closed), then you're not going to pick up any visual information around you. If you are not listening, then you won't pick up any auditory information.

We have presented memory in different ways. This is exactly what you have to do when you encode information. By looking at the data in different ways you can form better associations and memory traces within your brain and can choose a wider context from which to draw the data.






The instructions in the program direct the computer to input, process and output as follows:

The computer can selectively retrieve data into its main memory (RAM) from any peripheral device (terminal, disk, tape, etc.) connected to it. After processing the data internally, the computer can send a copy of the results from its memory out to any peripheral device. The more memory it has, the more programs and data it can work with at the same time.

By outputting data onto a magnetic disk or tape, the computer is able to store data permanently and retrieve it when required. A system's size is based on how much disk storage it has. The more disk, the more data are immediately available.

The computer performs all processing by "calculating," "comparing" and "copying" the data stored in its memory (RAM).

The computer can perform any mathematical operation on data by adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing one set with another.

The computer can analyze and evaluate data by matching it with sets of known data that are included in the program or called in from storage.

The computer can move data around to create any kind of report or listing in any order.

By calculating, comparing and copying, the computer accomplishes all forms of data processing. For example, records are sorted into a new order by comparing two records at a time and copying the record with the lower value in front of the one with the higher value.

The computer finds one customer out of thousands by comparing the requested account number to each record in the file. The query statement: SUM SALARY FOR TITLE = "NURSE" causes the computer to compare the title field in each record for NURSE and then add (calculate) the salary field for each match.

In word processing, inserting and deleting text is accomplished by copying characters from one place to another.

If you wonder whether the computer can solve a problem, identify your data on paper. If it can be calculated, compared and copied on paper, it can be processed in the computer.

The 3 C's - Finding Things This example counts all California records in the database by comparing each record with "CA." Every record in the database is read into memory. The memory locations that state is written into are compared with the letters "CA" in the program. If they are equal, a "1" is added to the California counter. The second record is written into the same memory bytes as the first record, and the field is compared again. This process is performed until the last record has been examined.

The 3 C's - Displaying and Printing Data are stored as contiguous fields in the database with no blanks in between. The data are displayed and printed the way we like to see it by writing the data into memory and copying the characters into the desired order. The date in this example is printed through a "picture," which is a set of characters that acts as a filter. Each character in the date is compared to a corresponding character in the picture, and the one copied as output is determined by the rules. Pictures can be implemented in software or in hardware.

The 3 C's - Sorting Sorting, or resequencing, data is accomplished by comparing each item of data with the others and copying it into the appropriate order. Of course, there is a ton of calculating going on to keep track of what is being compared. Years ago, when databases were stored on tape, the speed of a vendor's sort program was a powerful marketing feature. All transactions had to be sorted into account number sequence in order to be processed. In today's online systems, data are often indexed. Instead of sorting the actual data records themselves, the much smaller indexes are sorted.

The 3 C's - Editing The magic of word processing is nothing more than copying text. In this example, in order for the "O" to be inserted into the word, the remaining characters are copied one memory location (byte) to the right to make room for it. Deleting is copying in reverse. As in all data processing, there is a whole lot of calculating and comparing going on to keep track of where the text is stored in memory.


