Four important things you haveto know about growing hardy kiwifruits:
Male and female flowers are born on different plants, so bothmales and female vines must be planted, preferably interspaced foroptimum pollen spread. The plants often take several years to mature--from 3 to asmany as 9 years (though more than 3 is unusual, and some are evenquicker). Though the plants are extremely winter-hardy, they developshoots early in the spring that are quite sensitive to frost. Therecan be "shoot burn" in many years; though the plant usuallysurvives, regrows, and fruits despite, fruit will not develop thatyear. Hardy kiwi are extremely vigorously growing vines, requiring asubstantial supporting trellis.
The hardy kiwi prefers a sound,loamy, pH-neutral soil. Above all, the soil drainage must beperfect. Full sun is said to be best for good fruit production, butmany sources recommend partial shade for optimum overall success.Either way, it should definitely be well-sheltered from wind,especially in the colder months.

A. kolomikta is inherently quite cold resistant (butsee farther below), with dormant plants hardy down to at least-20°F. The chief problem encountered in growing hardy kiwi is thatthey are fairly low-chill plants, meaning that they are all toolikely to break bud a lot sooner than we'd like, and consequentlyencounter late-spring-freeze damage to the developing buds (eventhough the plants are safe enough). In a bad year, springfreeze damage can mean no crop that year.

The vines grow well on a wall, and can also be growninto trees. They are vigorous climbers, and require a sturdysupport. Plant the largest vines available, allowing one(nonfruiting) male for up to eight (fruiting) females. The vinescan be supported on a T-trellis that is about six feet high andwide,with 3-5 wires strung between the arms of the T. In thatscheme, space posts sixteen feet apart, with plants at half thatdistance.

Although hardy kiwifruits are, as their nameimplies, cold hardy, that cold-hardiness comesonly with age ; young plants commonly freeze back, delayingproduction. So plant the largest vines you can get hold of, andprotect the developing trunks from winter sun and cold with"Tree-Shelters", corn stalks, burlap, pipe insulation, or tree-wrapmaterial. Keep in mind that the trunks of hardy kiwifruits arerarely exposed to full sunlight in the wild, so don't be afraid towrap them well.

Fruit is produced on second-year wood, or on fruitspurs on older wood; pruning is best carried out in the winter,while the plant is dormant. Prune annually. Remove 70% of the wood--all thespent, misplaced, and tangled wood--leaving approximately 30%percent, composed of the previous year's new growth. When plantsare young, be sure you have one trunk, two cordons, and last year'spencil-sized new lateral growth (fruit spurs - close nodules).Removing more than about 70% will throw the plant out of balanceand it will become vegetative the following year: you need lastyear's fruit spurs present.


Trellising andPruning


As unlikely as it sounds, kiwicultivation is booming in Italy, with farmers lured by the highprofit margin, the ease with which it can be planted in formervineyards and the cachet of growing an exotic fruit. As the namesuggests, green fields stretch in every direction in Campoverde,Italy. But where grapes once dominated, the landscape now has a newking: kiwi.


You don't think "kiwi" when you think Italy. Infact, two of the letters that spell the word don't even form partof the Italian alphabet.

Nevertheless, kiwi cultivation is booming, withannual production at more than 400,000 tons, earning millions ofdollars for farmers and reviving the economy in once-moribundsections of Italy that people might have otherwise abandoned forthe city.

A kiwi plant, as it turns out, adapts fairly easilyto the infrastructure used for grapes. It is planted along the sameconfiguration of long, furrowed rows; The thin trunk is latched toa post, and its branches spread laterally to form a canopy, justlike the grape vine. From a distance you might not even spot thedifference, except that the leaves of the kiwi plant are rounder,fuller and a deeper shade of green.

In Italy's central Latina province, where farmsreplaced swampland drained during the Mussolini era, Gianni Cosmihas gradually been converting his family farm over to kiwi. Hestill dedicates about 50 acres to grapes, much of which ends up aswine. But 35 acres is now planted with kiwi. Sure, he agreed, it'sa shift in identity. But it's a profitable one.

"With grapes and wine, there is history," Cosmi, 47,said. "With the kiwi, there is adventure."

Or, what one might call the wow factor. It is quitethe attention-grabber when you say you raise kiwi, Cosmi marveledas he surveyed the rows and rows of spindly kiwi trees covering hisland.

"If you provide kiwi to the world, everyone takesnote," he said. "It is still seen as exotic and somethingdifferent."

About 80% of Italy's kiwi production is exported,the bulk to Europe and 15% going to the United States. Italy sendskiwis at roughly the opposite end of the calendar from when otherbig producers such as New Zealand do, providing the U.S. a virtualyear-round supply.

Even though kiwis need a lot more water than grapes,the green, tart fruit can earn three times the profit that grapesbring in, Cosmi said.

It requires a bit more manual labor, as well.Workers inspect the round pre-fruit pods for the perfect shape.Those that are judged lopsided are picked and tossed.

The fruit thrives in central Italy because of theclimate, with its relatively mild winters andwarm-but-not-scorching summers, and because of the area'smineral-rich volcanic soil.

And, it's naturally organic, said Cosmi, a formermayor of nearby Aprilia. No need for pesticides and only a littlefertilizer.

Italian kiwi took root here in Latina, and RenatoCampoli was its pioneer. Thirty years ago, as a young man, Campoliwas one of the first Italians to plant the fruit, almost on alark.

"I was looking for something new to do inagriculture," said Campoli, suntanned and with thick white hair.The tomatoes, beets and cows raised on his little family farmdidn't yield much of a living. A friend in Sweden had come across amysterious fruit called a kiwi, and he challenged Campoli: Plantthat!

"I didn't know a thing about it, not how tocultivate it, water it, prune it," Campoli, 57, recalled with alaugh. That first year, he was ready to give up. He was on theverge of destroying the first several hundred boxes of kiwi that hehad grown because, traveling the length and breadth of Italy, hecouldn't find a buyer. Finally, an organic co-op near Lake Bolsenaagreed to take the fruit.

Slowly, Campoli built what he assumed would be aniche market. But, over time, business took off as the fruit'spopularity grew across the world and Italy positioned itself tofill in the Southern Hemisphere's production gaps. Campoli's lifewas transformed. His five-acre farm is today a 50-acre spread. Hisson, who would assuredly have run off to the city in search ofwork, is instead getting an environmental engineering degree andwill come home to run the business.

Campoli didn't even taste a kiwi before he startedgrowing it. It was a bit strange; some of his relatives thought ittoo sour. Today he is expanding into a new variety of the fruit,with yellow flesh, called "Kiwigold."

The sweeter golden kiwi, unlike the green version,was patented by the New Zealand company that developed it, and soItalian growers such as Campoli have to get a license to plant it.Word has it that efforts are underway to create a red version.

Italians are learning to love kiwi, sort of. Morekiwi is eaten in Italy than anywhere else in Europe, and per capitaconsumption is seven times that in the U.S. Its price has come downover the years and these days costs only a few cents more thanapples or bananas.

But here where it's grown, kiwi still hasn'tpermeated the culture the way, say, garlic is king in Gilroy. Thereare no gigantic kiwi statues at local gas stations here. There areno kiwi festivals, the way Tuscany has olive festivals andcinghiale (wild boar) festivals. You can order and be served a kiwiat the Campoverde coffee bar, but the barman might not cut itcorrectly (as he didn't the other day when a visitor orderedone).

Cosmi, the former mayor and proud kiwi grower, hopesthis will change. He is also president of the Latina KiwiConsortium, an umbrella grouping of the province's farmers. Theconsortium's logo is a kiwi cut in half and plopped inside an imageof the ancient Roman Colosseum.

Italian kiwi farmers, who have a trade magazine andbiannual conventions (standing room only the last few years), planto launch a publicity campaign with radio and TV spots, billboardsand other promotional gimmicks, Cosmi said. They will extol thefruit's vitamin-rich nutritional virtues, as well as itsenvironmentally friendly cultivation, in an effort to expand bothconsumption and the market.
At least in North America, thereseems so far little cultivar distinction. One reads of "ArcticBeauty", but that seems to be mostly or entirely just a nicknamefor the entire kolomikta species, rather than any cultivarof it.

The few named varieties (all female--the males seemto have no cultivar names) mentioned in the literature, notcounting things identified only by codes, are: September Sun : no information--this appears to be the Sentyabraskaya also listed below Red Beauty : no information--this might be acommercial name for some other cultivar in this list Krupnopladnaya : large-fruited; flavor is said to beexcellent; sugar content c. 14% when fully ripe); low to moderatevigor but cold-hardy and productive. Pautske : a vigorous cultivar; its fruit are large and ofgood quality; the plants are more vigorous than those of Krupnopladnaya but still really vigorous. Aromatnaya : medium-size fruit; sugar content c. 20% whenfully ripe; fruit ripens in late summer; productive. Tomoko : no information save the name. Matovaya : no information save the name. Sentiabrskaya : no information save the name--nowmarketed as "September Sun". Aromatnaya : no information save the name. Paukðtës Ðakarva : no information save the name. Landë : no information save the name. Lankë : no information save the name. Laiba : no information save the name. Anyksta : no information save the name. Dr. Szymanowski : no information save the name.
