What is raised bed gardening and why should you be interested?

Raised bed gardening is a great way to grow flowers, herbs, fruits, and vegetables. Raised bed gardens offer a host of advantages, and are aesthetically pleasing. Some of the prettiest and best kept gardens, are grown in raised beds. There is something about a raised bed garden, that make gardeners more conscious about the appearance of their plants. And raised bed gardening comes with many benefits.


In short, raised bed gardening is planting that's not done directly in the ground. Instead, the garden is usually planted some kind of raised container. There are square raised beds, rectangular raised beds, and round raised beds. You can make a raised bed just about any shape you want and, yes, container planters are a form of raised bed.
You don't have to have land the size of Green Acres to garden successfully. You know what I mean -- land stretching out for days.
You also do not have to grow vegetables in the ground. There's nothing out there anywhere that says a veggie garden will only be successful if you have an acre of ground to plant in.
Raised beds don't have to be works of art -- they don't have to be structurally sound or be able to withstand a 7.3 earthquake. They just have to hold soil. You can grow almost anything in raised beds: tomatoes, peppers, cilantro, oregano, squash, beans, dill, basil, eggplant, spinach, musk melon (small cantaloupe), scallions, and fennel. From potatoes to tomatoes to a cutting garden full of zinnias, you can do it in a raised bed.
It's astonishing how much can grow in a small raised bed garden. Especially with the help of vertical gardening using trellises.
The only exceptions would be really large-scale shrubs like azaleas and hydrangeas or trees. Although, you could probably plant dwarf trees in them. If you want to grow larger scale veggies like squash, zucchini, melon, or watermelon, you'll probably need most of one end of the raised bed for them to sprawl out in.
One of the greatest advantages to raised bed gardening is that you control the soil content. You've got clay soil, like in Virginia? Not a problem. Build some raised beds and fill them with a mix of garden soil, compost and something to lighten it up -- vermiculite, perlite, peat moss, or even some sand. One thing you should know is to never use topsoil -- it's too dense and muddy.
You can even combine garden soil with potting mix because the potting mix already has some perlite in it and this tends to be a lighter, fluffier soil. You do want to avoid heavy soil density in raised bed or container gardening, though . It's like trying to grow plants in wet concrete. The lighter and fluffier it is the easier it will be for plants' roots to grow.
And raised bed gardening does not have to be on the ground. If you have a bad back or you have avoided gardening because you don't want to look like one of those pieces of bent over garden art -- you know the ones, women with fat butts in bloomers -- build your garden beds higher.
Garden Versatility is perhaps the first benefit offered by Raised Bed Gardening.
Cultivating soil in a traditional row garden takes time. Even if your house is located on the most wonderful loam in the world. It still takes time to make it better. Using raised beds allows you to garden instantly.
And you don't have to put to raised beds on dirt or grass. You can place them on a deck or patio. If you do that, it's best to put some kind of bottom on the raised bed box or even set them on pallets. The point is when putting a raised bed on a hard surface like concrete, give the plants' roots some air. Make these beds a bit deeper by making the sides of the bed higher -- that allows for plenty of plant growth.


Raised garden beds are great for small plots of veggies and flowers. They keep pathway weeds from your garden soil, prevent soil compaction, provide good drainage and serve as a barrier to pests such as slugs and snails.


Because the soil is above ground level, heavy rains drain off much better. Standing water is entirely eliminated. And, the existence and length of waterlogged soil after heavy downpours is minimized.
Warmer soil The soil is elevated above ground level, allowing the sun and air to warm it faster. This facilitates earlier planting, and better seed germination, especially in colder, more northern climates.
Easy to reach Less bending over and stretching makes the joys of working in your garden and harvesting it far more pleasurable. People with back or knee problems, other handicaps, and elderly people really appreciate the ease of access.
Control of soil content Sure, you can use soil from the surrounding area. But, people with raised beds will bring in as much as 100% of the soil, compost and manure they need to fill the beds. The resulting mix is a vast improvement over the soil in your back yard. In addition, growers seek a soil mix that is ideal for the plants they will grow in their raised beds.
Appearance Raised beds make for just about the most attractive gardens around. Maybe, it just seems that way, or it's personal preference. More likely, it's the fact that people who use raised beds tend to care more about the overall appearance of their garden .


I guess a real good reason for vegetable gardening via the raised bed method would be the reduction in soil compaction. Your plant roots always need air and with your ordinary gardening procedures it requires you stepping into the garden and compacting the soil wherever you step. A well designed raised bed garden allows all the work to be accomplished from the garden path, stone or lawn.
You can easily space your plants a little closer to each other because you need not allow for places to step. There are exceptions to this rule. Tomato plants require room to spread even though you may have them contained by cages. In 4" x 6" raised bed 6 tomato plants is sufficent allowing enough room for spreading branches and room to plant smaller plants among them.
The raised garden bed allows for excess moisture to drain away and enables the plant roots with the ability to breath. This is especially helpful in areas that have moisture laden soils like Florida and other southern areas. It maybe the sole method of growing some types of vegetable plants at all.
The soil conditions are kept well under control in this type of environment and the soil types can be modified from raised garden bed to raised garden bed depending on the requirements of the vegetable plants. Your water,fertilizer,mulch can be an easier chore to apply because they only need to be applied to the raised bed gardens and not the entire garden.
It has been noted by various reports that a raised garden bed results in 1.4 to 2 times as much product per square foot as your common gardening area. It makes your job easy to manage with less work and definitely with less diseases as those in the ordinary garden. It also results in more product than the ordinary garden.


Making a raised bed garden frame is relatively easy. All you need is a hammer, saw, wood and some nails. If you want an even easier set-up, you can buy long lasting, heavy duty plastic raised beds, that are both quick to set-up, and strikingly attractive.
The frame can be landscape timbers, railroad ties, two by tens, concrete blocks or just about any other durable and strong material that will hold in your soil. Even an old tractor trailer tire can be used. T his was in fashion some y ears ago. Make sure the frame is sturdy enough to hold in the soil. Anchor the sides from collapsing outward if need be. The bottom should be open. If you are using a box or container of any kind, remove the bottom to provide good drainage. Do not line the bottom of the frame with plastic which will impede drainage.
Make sure the width of the bed is no more than two arms lengths.This way you can reach any part of the garden without stretching or climbing across the bed and plants.


The BEST raised garden is built within the walls of wooden sides, and this is especially desirable if your soil content is heavy. First, prepare the area where you want to assemble your raised bed. The dimensions should be kept to four foot wide and six foot long using a board that is at least 8 to 10 inches inches high. Why, you might ask, why so high? Because critters like rabbits and squirrels are prevented from getting into the garden as long as you have the raised bed away from trees or hanging branches.


Materials needed t o build your own raised bed: This plan uses two stacked 2" x 6" boards for each side.
Lumber : Use cedar 2" x 6" for the sides, and 4" x 4" for the corner posts. If you have wood wider than 2" x 6", it's fine to use but the overall height of the bed should be 12" or less. If cedar is not available, ask your lumber dealer for locally available weather resistant wood.
Fastenings : Use 3.5 galvanized 'spiral' nails. You'll need 32 - 40 nails for this project. (3" galvanized screws can used in place of nails - they will hold better but are a little more expensive.)
Size : The bed can be made any size you like, but consider: Width : 4' should be a maximum width, so it's easy to reach the middle of the bed. Length : Raised beds longer than 6' will require additional stakes in the middle of the two long sides to keep them from bowing under the weight of the soil.
Is treated lumber safe? Treated lumber is often used for outdoor projects. Chemicals used to preserve lumber include organic compounds such as pentachlorophenol, creosote and coal tars. Other preservatives contain chromated copper arsenate (CCA), ammonical copper arsenate and acid copper chromate. There is growing concern about the dangers of arsenic leaching into the ground or rubbing off on people's hands from CCA-treated wood.
Until the safety of treated wood is proven conclusively, we recommend you use a naturally rot-resistant wood like red cedar, black locust or redwood. Under most circumstances, these woods will last 10 - 20 years when used for raised beds. Recycled composite plastic lumber is another alternative, and is now available in a variety of sizes and colors.
Construction: Cut the 4" x 4" to four 18" lengths. Sharpen the ends with a handsaw or hatchet. (This does not have to be pretty - only the worms will see.) Assemble the two short sides first, on a firm, flat surface. Lay two of the sharpened corner pieces down, set two of the 2" x 6"'s on top and line up the edges. Pre-drill the nail holes to avoid splitting the wood. Be sure the drill bit you use is just a bit thinner than the nails. Stand one of the assembled sides up on its top edge, so the sharpened ends of the corner posts are pointing up. Set one long piece in place and nail the one end to the corner post. Now your construction will stand on its own (upside down) and be easier to finish. Nail the remaining long pieces to the one short side. Set the other short side in place and finish the job. (If your bed is longer than 6", you'll Flip it over and you're ready to install.
Set bed in place and tap down corners. If the bed has built-in stakes, as in the 'build-your-own' model described above, drive one corner down a few inches, then go on to the others and do the same. Repeat this process until bed is at ground level. If you try to drive one corner all the way down before going on to the others, you put too much twist on the structure and may split out one of the stakes.
Level the bed. Use a level for this task. This may seem overly meticulous, but after several waterings the soil will settle to level, and you',l want the bed to be the same. Set a stiff board (2x4) on top of the bed sides, across the span, and set your level on this board. Tap down the sides as needed till you get a level reading. Be sure to check for level both along the length and across the width of your bed.


One of the best things about having a raised bed frame in your garden, is the soil you put into it. Here is where gardeners excel.


Drainage can be improved drastically by adding a medium fine stone to a depth of about two to three inches before adding your soil. You can purchase bags of top soil from the local garden shop. You will have to be the judge of your depth, but you can always make another trip if you do not have enough on the first attempt.


Filling your raised bed starts with lots and lots of compost. Most raised beds contain far more compost than the garden itself.

A one-third mix with your top soil is adequate. However, if a loam top soil is available you will require less organic matter. The soil must be dry when you mix it with the organic matter and if clumps in either the compost or soil exist they must be separated and mixed evenly with the soil before putting them into the bed.


While you can use soil from the surrounding area, it is best to select the soil mixture that is ideal for the plants you are planning to grow. If the raised bed is really high, use soil from the surrounding area at the bottom.


You can use roughly 25% soil from your yard as a base. Add in equal parts sand and compost to form a good, well-draining soil. After you've mixed your soil, check the pH to make sure it isn't too acidic or alkaline.

The materials you use in the frame, could easily need adjustment to reach an ideal pH level for your plants.


It is also a good idea to have some kind of time watering system or even a dedicated hose in the area of your raised garden bed, such as sprinkler that spins, projecting the water over your raised beds.

However, overhead watering with a hose may cause your plants to become more susceptible to disease as foliage that stays moist too long can be a host of fungus and other diseases. Collecting water with rain barrels is one eco friendly way to keep your garden irrigated without using city water.


A drip hose is another option, which makes the raised bed more maintenance free and efficient. Add it at or just below the soil level . Make sure to work it in a pattern that will evenly cover the entire area in the raised bed.


Raised beds are very easy to irrigate, and they will help cut down on your water bill. You will only need to water where you plants are growing, and not the spaces between the rows or areas for walking around and working in your garden.
Maintaining Your Raised Bed Garden Maintaining your raised beds is easy. All you really need to do is work the soil periodically and add organic matter. It's best to add organic compost in the early spring, before you plant, so that your soil will have adequate nutrients throughout the growing season. When you're resting your raised bed for the winter, you can also add a thin layer of crushed leaves or other garden waste to the top of the raised bed.
In the rare case that your plants have suffered from a soil-borne disease, you may need to remove all the soil from the bed and replace it will fresh soil. If this does happen, you can change out the soil in the bed and continue gardening. This is quite different than with traditional garden beds, where you need to let the bed rest for sometimes up to two years to let the risk of disease to dissipate. Also, keep track of soil drainage after several growing seasons, as you may need to add more sand or organic material and rework the soil.
You'll also need to monitor the conditions of the building materials for your raised beds. Woods like cedar are very sturdy and should be fine for many growing seasons. If you've built your raised beds from concrete blocks or bricks, periodically check the mortar and make sure the structure is still sturdy.
To discourage pests from attacking your plants, you can add extra protection to both the top and the bottom of your raised beds. If you've got an elevated raised bed you can cover the bottom of the bed with chicken wire or a similar kind of material to stop animals such as rodents from eating your vegetables. Birds also like to eat veggies and fruits, so you can consider placing bird netting over your raised beds.
To avoid problems with weeds, make sure to mulch your raised beds. An organic bark mulch will work well, and black plastic mulches or weed guards are another option for added protection against weeds. In general, you'll find that weeding your raised beds is much easier than a traditional garden bed.
Note that the sides of your raised beds may heat up in the summer and cause the soil to dry out a little quicker. Simply monitor the soil in your raised beds during the hottest months of the year so that your plants stay healthy and aren't stressed. Note that this same characteristic of raised beds allows them to heat up faster in the spring and fall, which means you can cultivate your plants earlier in the growing season.
In addition to traditional gardening with your raised beds, you can easily modify them to further enhance the gardening experience. For example, you can quickly transform your raised beds into a kind of greenhouse if you place a simple plastic structure around them to hold in the heat during colder months. This is a simple kind of green house called a cold frame. You can be as elaborate as you want with your cold frame, and can design them so you can remove the plastic liner or break down the entire structure during the summer to allow easier access to your raised beds.


Mulch. To make your raised bed almost maintenance free, use plastic mulch to keep weeds out. Add organic mulches of your choice for appearance.
Make a series of smaller beds. Landscape around the beds with stone, mulch or add paving blocks to create whatever style and look you desire.


Double-dig the bed area. Turn over the soil to a depth of 16 Leave soil piled up in the center, away from the sides.
Burrowing pests? If your garden has burrowing pests such as moles, a layer of 1" poultry netting (chicken wire) can be laid across the bottom, before soil is added. The mesh should continue at least 3" up along the insides of the bed and be stapled in place. If you plan to grow root crops, such as potatoes or carrots, you may want to set the chicken wire lower in the ground by digging deeper when you are setting up the bed.
Spread soil out evenly. Add any planned soil amendments, such as peat, compost or lime, and spread the soil evenly across the bed. Water the bed with an even, fine spray. This will settle the soil; add more soil to "top off". (Over time the soil will settle an inch or two more.) Rake the bed once more to even out the soil and youe ready to plant.
Avoid stepping on the bed. Once the soil is added and the bed is planted, make it a policy to never step on the bed. Stepping on the bed will compact the soil, reduce aeration and impact root growth. Pets should also be trained to stay off the raised beds.
Pathway width. It helps when pathways between raised beds are wide enough for a small wheelbarrow. For grass pathways, make sure they are at least wide enough for a weedeater or a small mower.
Mulch the pathways between beds. Weeding pathways is a nuisance which you can avoid by putting a double layer of perforated landscape cloth over the pathway, and cover this with a 2- 3" layer of bark mulch. When laying down the landscape cloth, allow it to come up 1" against the bottom board of the bed, and staple this to the bed. This will not be visible because the mulch will cover it.
Some weeds will still appear on your pathways regardless of the mulch. Wait until it rains before pulling them out, or you may rip the landscape cloth. The weeds will come out easily if the ground is wet.
