USS YORKTOWN - A NATION'S PATRIOTICJOY The modern aircraft carrier is used to transportairplanes safely to a theater of war, and to provide a safe havenfor them too. In that sense they are more like portable islandsthan mere transporters, and may make a decisive difference to anybattle. Fortunately for them, their aircraft usually form adefensive shield around them that's nigh-impossible to penetrate.That's because the pilots know that if their carrier is sunk, theymay have to follow it down to the ocean depths too.
Few people who have not seen aircraft carrierspersonally can comprehend their immense size and cost. In fact theyare often several football stadiums long. For this reason, they areusually modified and upgraded several times in the course of theirfighting careers, as opposed to being scrapped after two decades,as often happens with smaller, less expensive ships.




In the early1940's, America was locked into a fierce battle with the Japanesenavy in the Pacific Ocean. The Essex-class aircraft carrierYORKTOWN was part of a core naval force offast carriers that was to cause heavy losses on the Japanese,especially in the Marianas and at Truk.


The huge aircraft carrier alsoprovided support in the Philippines and at Iwo Jima and witnessedthe enemy's final defeat. In recognition of this, the huge butgraceful ship was awarded 11 Battle Stars, and a President'sCitation in 1945. Later, YORKTOWN addedanother 4 Battle Stars for her service in the aftermath of theVietnamese war.
Unlike many of her sister ships, YORKTOWN saw herservice through largely undamaged, despite sailing through typhoonsand taking direct hits. In gratitude, she was not sent to breaker'syards. Instead, her grateful nation preserved her for posterityinstead.

Who knows what human dramas played out among themountainous Pacific waves, as shells came crashing down andsuicidal Kamikaze aircraft appeared from the clouds. What mustthose tender young recruits have thought as, stripped down to theirshorts, they tried their best to save their ship, their comradesand themselves while battling fierce tropical heat. Their families and lovers back home went throughterrifying times too. What news they had was so rigorously censoredthat bad news sometimes arrived in the form of a coffin draped inthe Stars and Stripes. Some recovered and went on to find newpartners. Others lived the rest of their lives in silentgrief.
Spare a thought for the Japanese sailors and pilotstoo, for they were also innocent victims of a senseless war theydid not choose. Many of their fine warships buckled under mercilessAmerican bombardments, hell-bent on seeking revenge for what theysaw as Japanese treachery at Pearl Harbor. How many young Japaneseseamen slipped beneath the waves calling to their mothers for thelast time too I wonder. And how many young airmen succumbed tohelplessness, when they returned to an aircraft carrier that was nolonger waiting for them as they had hoped...




YORKTOWN andher sister ships continued to form the basis of the American fleetlong after the Japanese forces surrendered and the world returnedto peace. She even helped recover the Apollo Eight capsule that hadgone out towards the stars in hope that there were better thingsfor mankind to strive for. But as the years went by the gracefulship succumbed to age as must we all. Her steel plates began toweaken and her mighty engines tire. She was finally decommissionedin 1975. The authorities decided she should become a floatingmuseum instead of going to the breaker's yard sparing her thatignominy. And so she finally rests in peace with guns gone silent,as Patriot Point's leading showpiece and a national historiclandmark for all time.

USSYORKTOWN - A PROUD TRADITION

YORKTOWN wasnot the first America aircraft carrier to bear that name. Herpredecessor - also an aircraft carrier - sank at Midway after anillustrious career that spanned more than a decade. During a greatturning point of the Pacific War she successfully damaged theJapanese aircraft carrier Soryu and helped sink the Hiryu and Mikuma too.Unfortunately successive strikes by avenging dive bombers andtorpedo planes mortally wounded her, and she had to give up thefight. Her wreck lies well preserved threemiles deep down in the ocean, where she has been named a war grave.The ship we write about was her successor.



USS YORKTOWN - TECHNICALSPECIFICATION

Even by today's standards YORKTOWN was huge, with an originaldisplacement of 27,000 tons rising to 30,000 tons in 1956, when herhull was lengthened to 888 feet to create a longer flightpath. Inthe process her beam increased to 101 feetas well, in order to accommodate larger and faster planes.

With a draft of 30 feet, and a maximumspeed of 30 knots or more, YORKTOWN couldcarry her complement of 360 officers, 3000 enlisted men and 90aircraft a distance of 14,000 nauticalmiles at an average speed of 13 knots (25 kilometers per hour). Herarmament consisted of twenty-two 5 in/38cal guns, sixty-eight 40mm 917 quad mounts, sixty-one 20mm singlemounts, and four 5 in/38 caliber deadly weapons. An impressivefire-power by all accounts, and more than sufficient to striketerror into the hearts of enemies.

She was built in an incredibly short 16months at Newport News, Virginia, attesting to the urgency withwhich a Navy, battling with heavy losses, was waiting on herservice. YORKTOWN repaid the nation's trustin an exemplary manner. Indeed she continues to be the exampleothers hope to follow,



USS YORKTOWN - BRIEFHISTORY

It's not easy to compress the proud tradition of a mighty ship intoso few lines, especially out of respect for the fine men and womenwho served on her, and the sacrifices they they made. Later in thisarticle we provide more detailed information. For the moment pleasebe content with this.

Her kee l name as shewas laid down on the builder's slip was "BON HOMME RICHARD", namedafter Captain John Paul Jones' armed sailing ship the "BonhommeRichard" that served so valiantly in America's first fight forfreedom in the War of Independence centuries ago. The modern shipthat bears her name was launched by Theodore Roosevelt's wife in1941, after which she spent time being fitted out. In 1942, shortlyafter the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor the brand-new aircraftcarrier was re-badged as a salute to her predecessor, that had sunkthree months earlier at the Battle of Midway. She finally sailedoff to war and into history in 1943. Following nine years of loyal service to thecause of freedom - during which time they saw their nation finallyvictorious, and carried her flag in triumph all around the world -the YORKTOWN 'screw enjoyed a welcome respite at Puget Sound, as the NavalDockyard converted their beloved ship into an even more powerfulfighting machine.
When she was re-commissioned as an attackaircraft carrier in February 1953, YORKTOWN boasted an angled flight deck and enclosed hurricane bow torepel the ocean rollers. She returned to service eight monthslater. Her last re-classification was asAntisubmarine Warfare Support Aircraft Carrier from 1 September1957 onwards. After the YORKTOWN wasfinally decommissioned in 1970 following 30 years of sterlingservice, a grateful nation chose to preserve her as a memorial tothose glorious fighting days. And that is how it came about that the futuregenerations may visit YORKTOWN and vicariously share in the dramasthat unfolded around her. War has become less fashionable and sohas patriotism too. Will the time be reached that her message is nolonger wanted. Will the proud ship rest in peace, be preserved downthe centuries, or sadly rot away. Only time will tell, and you andI will not be there when that happens.


USSYORKTOWN - BATTLE HONORS


On 9 September , YORKTOWN stood out to seafully fitted out and battle ready, heading for the United Stateswest coast. She arrived in San Francisco on the 13th, where hercrew loaded supplies and aircraft, before returning to sea again onthe 15th. Four days later, she docked in Pearl Harbor to take onfresh supplies. After ten days relaxing in the Hawaiian Islands,the crew conned YORKTOWN out to sea again. At dawn on 5th Octoberher pilots began two days of air attacks on Japanese Wake Island.Following that, the blooded crew returned to Pearl Harbor forfurther training.
On 10 November, YORKTOWN left PearlHarbor with a larger attack force, tasked with occupying theGilbert Islands. On the morning of the 19th, she launched a seriesof raids to suppress enemy air-power during amphibious assaults.Her airplanes later provided support to ground troops challengingstiff Japanese opposition. After that, she sailed away victoriousfor a month of advanced air training operations in the HawaiianIslands.Who knows what those soldiers on the Gilbert Islands musthave thought, as they watched her steam across the distant horizon,and then turn to mop up the remainder of the resistance theyfaced.


YORKTOWN's 1944 began with a mission to support an amphibious assault onthe Marshall Islands. Again, her primary role was to act asfloating airfield for attacks on Taroa airfield on MaloelapAtoll.Throughout the day, her aircraft bombed and strafed the enemyin preparation for assaults on Majuro and Kwajalein later on thatmonth. On the 30th, the task force shifted focus to softening upKwajalein itself. As the troops stormed ashore from their landingcraft the following day, YORKTOWN 's pilots continued in a vicious supporting role.A few days later the fleet retired to newly captured Majuro Atoll -to bandage their wounds, make repairs, and prepare for the nextchallenge.

In the course of the next fourmonths the aircraft carrier joined battle in a series of daringraids. These ranged from the Marianas in the north to New Guinea inin the south.After eight days of continuous battle the fleet turnedits attention to the main Japanese anchorage at Truk Atoll. On the18th, YORKTOWN andher consorts set course back to the Marianas, attacking enemyairfields and installations on Saipan on the way. Thereafter, thebattle fleet returned to Majuro Lagoon, where they stayed to rest,recuperate and and replenish through to 8th March. During thisbitter sweet time, YORKTOWN's valiant young crew were able toexperience a semblance of reality, as they played baseball ongolden sandy beaches, drank cold beer in Pacific island pubs, and,if at all possible fraternized with the alluring local girls whowere fascinated by their mighty ship. It is part of the greatsadness of war that we allow our young men and women the illusionof freedom from responsibility, before returning them to theiniquitous violence of war, and often death.


The illusion over, the shore-gearpacked away and magazines restocked with shells for battle, YORKTOWN set out againtowards the deeper ocean an agonizingly short four days later. On13th March, 1944 she reached Espiritu Santo in the New Hebrides,where she stood down waiting for orders for the next ten days. Soonafter that she found herself launching air strikes on enemyinstallations located in the Palau Islands, and on the nearbyisland of Woleai. Five days after that she returned to base, for aweek of replenishment and recreation that had become thepattern.

By 13th April YORKTOWN was back at sea again Thistime, however, she laid a course for the New Guinea north coast,where she had been ordered to launch raids in support of GeneralDouglas MacArthur' assault on Hollandia. Her planes first attackedinstallations in the Wakde-Sarmi area of northern New Guinea. Onthe 22nd and 23rd, they shifted attention to the beaches ofHollandia itself, in direct support of the landing force preparingto invade. After several further sorties, YORKTOWN entered PearlHarbor on 11th May for further training in the Hawaiian Islands, toprepare her for her next major amphibious support operation. Thiswas to be the assault on the Marianas themselves. It was also thefinal opportunity for her well-trained crew to grab a shortrespite, catch a final suntan, and write letters to their families,lovers and friends.


On 6th June YORKTOWN set sail again. After fivedays of steady steaming she was close enough to send planes aloftfor the preliminary softening up of airfields located on Guam.These raids continued until the 13th, when YORKTOWN steamed north to attacktargets on the Bonin Islands in the company with two other majorwarships. After that, the battle force headed back towards theMarianas to join battle in the Philippine Sea. All-in-all, YORKTOWN claimed thirty-seven enemy planesdestroyed, and dropped twenty-one tons of bombs on Guam airbases.

On the morning of the 20thas YORKTOWN wassteaming west with Task Force 58,search planes spotted the retiringJapanese combined fleet. She immediately launched 40 air planesbetween 16h23 and 16h43 that afternoon. Her pilots found AdmiralOzawa's force in the early evening, when they began a blisteringattack on an enemy aircraft carrier named Zuikaku. They damaged,but failed to sink it. By the next morning, the enemy ships hadvanished once again in the elusively vast Pacific Ocean.

YORKTOWN returned to the Marianas to resume air strikes on Pagan. On24th June, she launched another series of raids on Iwo Jima. Thefollowing day she headed for Eniwetok,arriving there two dayslater. She renewed combat operations in early July with a series ofattacks on Iwo Jima and Chichi Jima. On the 6th of June, her pilotsresumed their air strikes on the Marianas and continued with themfor the following seventeen days. On 23rd July, she turned west fora series of raids on Yap, Ulithi, and the Palaus. After that, shereturned to her base in the Marianas for a shortrespite.


A bombshell dropped. YORKTOWN wasto return home for a refit. Finally, there were moments for alittle home-leave. Imagine the excitement of her crew - stillbitter-sweetly young but also battle-hardened - when they learnedthat they were heading home for a two-month overhaul. There canhave been few dry eyes on that American jetty when the huge, butgraceful aircraft carrier slid gently into Puget Sound Navy Yard on17th August in the company of numerous, chivvying tugs. Repairscompleted all to soon, YORKTOWN stopped by at Alameda Naval Air Station from 11thto 13th October to load airplanes and ammunition ,before reportingback to Task Group 38/4 patrolling near Ulithi.


A period of mixed duties followed,involving air attacks on numerous enemy garrisons. On 13thDecember, YORKTOWN rejoined Task Force 38 to launch air strikes on targets on theisland of Luzon, which was destined for invasion in the second weekof January 1945. While returning home to base, the American forcesfound themselves in the heart of a typhoon that sank threedestroyers with tragic loss of life. Many lives were saved, but therescuers dared not stay too long for fear of enemy submarines.Hopefully, not too many desperate pairs of young American eyeswatched them sail away later, into the dark night.
YORKTOWN fueled and provisioned at Ulithi until30th December, where after she sailed back into the Pacific to seefurther action at Lingayen, Luzon and Formosa. On 10th January,Task Force 38 entered the South China Sea through Bashi Channel, inorder to begin attacking Japan's inner defenses for the first time.The Task Force's pilots sunk forty-four ships of which fifteen werearmed. Following attacks on Canton and Hong Kong too, the convoyreturned to Ulithi once again, to refuel and re-arm. After participating in a variety of sortiesthroughout the immediate area, YORKTOWN once again launched attackson the Japanese mainland hoping that her final moment of reckoninghad begun. These included strafing and bombing airfields defendingTokyo. On the 26th, her ammunition stocks were getting dangerouslylow. And so she returned to Ulithi once again, to replenishammunition and supplies. She steamed out again on 14th March, thistime heading for Okinawa.
Four days later at 08h00 in the morning the carriercame under direct attack from a twin-engined enemy bomber, followedby a second one. The ship's gunners did the work they had beentrained for, and dispatched both airplanes to the sea. Thatafternoon the enemy returned with three fresh planes. The first twowere destroyed, The third and final one released a bomb that hitthe signal bridge, penetrated the deck and exploded against thehull below. The force of the explosion drove two holes through herside and killed five crewman. YORKTOWN'S gunners promptly shot theoffending bomber down, while their carrier steamed on as if nothinguntoward had happened.

YORKTOWN pressed on to complete hertasks at Okinawa . These included airstrikes to soften up enemy defenses. Her attacks continued untilthe 28th, when she returned to Japanese waters for further strikeson the Japanese home islands. On the 29th, the carrier carried outtwo air raids and one photographic reconnaissance mission high inthe air above Kyushu. At about 14h10 that afternoon, a Japanesekamikaze aircraft attempted a suicide dive directly onto YORKTOWN in revenge. Heranti-aircraft gunners opened up with everything they had, scoringnumerous direct hits. The Japanese airplane passed low over theship and terrifying close to her command and control island. Thenit crashed into the water just off the aircraft carrier's port beamwith a huge splash. YORKTOWN had once again escaped her nemesis. Friendand foe alike began to believe that she was destined to take herplace in history, alongside great names like Nelson's Victory andOld Ironsides. More challenges lay ahead though. Could she survivethe violent final conflict, or would she too end up on the bottomof the ocean as had so many of her enemies?


On March 30th, YORKTOWN and her consort aircraftcarriers began to concentrate on the island of Okinawa. For twodays, aircraft from the world's mightiest battle fleet pounded theisland in a series of softening up air strikes. On the first ofApril, America's finest assault troops stormed ashore. For afurther six weeks, YORKTOWNdispatched her planes to provide directsupport for the brave troops operating on hard-held bridgeheads.Every three days she retired eastward to re-fuel, rearm andre-provision. On 7th April 1945 American spotter planes discovereda Japanese task force steaming south for one last, desperate,offensive. The chips were finally down. The armada included thefortress-like Japanese battleship Yamato bristling with hugeguns.There could only be one winner in the conflict that followedlater that same day.


YORKTOWN and the other American aircraft carriers with her launchedimmediate air strikes, throwing all they had into the mightybattle. This time their revenge was quick. Three torpedoes tookcare of Yamato. Three 500-pound bombs sent her light cruiser escortto the bottom too. This may have represented the final defeat ofthe Imperial Japanese Navy, but not the end of Japanese resistance.Something more was required to break their ironresolve.


YORKTOWN returned to Okinawa intriumph. On 11th April she came under air attack for a second time,as a Kamikaze pilot careered towards her out of the sun. This timeher anti-aircraft gunners were waiting. As soon as the loneairplane was in range, they shot force was ordered back to Ulithi,so their guns could cool, and their loyal crews relax, if but for afew short days.
Following a further months attacking varioustargets, YORKTOWN's crew got what they had been waiting for -orders to attack the Japanese mainland and important industrialcities there. By 11th July, they were off Honshu and attackingTokyo itself, until bad weather intervened. On the 24th her pilotsresumed their air attacks with even greater resolve - this timepounding the Kure Naval Base with 1000 pound bombs that demolishedthe arsenal, destroyed Japan's remaining capital ships, andeliminated workshops that had been building submarines.

August was another exceptionally busy month of ongoing air strikesthat seemed as if they would never end. On the 29th and 30th JulyYORKTOWN shifted her attention back to Tokyo for a while. A typhoonintervened until the 9th of August when she again attacked thecity. A few days later America dropped those two notorious atomicbombs. Japan capitulated. The war was suddenly over, asunexpectedly as it had begun. YORKTOWN'S guns fell eerily silenttoo.

A surreal period followed as the Task Force steamed almostaimlessly across the surrounding ocean while negotiators hammeredout a peace agreement on the mainland. After that, YORKTOWN's roleshifted to providing cover for the rapidly growing Americanoccupation force. When Japan formally surrendered on 2nd September,her pilots could finally begin dropping food supplies to theircomrades still trapped in prison camps, and hopelessly short offood. After that, YORKTOWN steamed triumphantly into Tokyo Bay, sothat her crew could relax and see what they hadachieved.
After that, it was time to load as many passengersas she could - including freed prisoners of war in desperate needof medical attention - and return home for the first time since herre-fit. On 16th September, YORKTOWN entered Tokyo Bay to load them.Following a non-stop voyage, she entered San Francisco Bay on 20thOctober, and moored at Alameda Naval Air Station to offloadpassengers. She remained there until the end of the month, afterwhich she moved to Hunters Point Navy Yard to repair minordamage.
This must have been an incredible period for herbattle-hardened crew and their young ones. The young lads who wentoff to war had returned as men, unused to anything but navaldiscipline, and frustrated with people who had no idea of what theyhad been through. Perhaps they were almost glad to be recalled on2nd November, as the mighty ship they called their home sailed offfor Guam, to repatriate American servicemen home. She was back inless than a month. By 13th January 1946 her repatriation task wascompleted. After a period of inactivity, she was placed in reserveon 21st of June.


YORKTOWN remained in limbo foralmost five years. In June 1952 she was reactivated at the heightof the Korean War, and work began on her at Puget Soundimmediately. Her conversion continued into 1953, withpost-conversion trials held late in January. On 20 February 1953,the huge aircraft carrier was recommissioned under command ofCaptain William Nation. After routine patrols along America's westcoast for testing, she steamed off for Pearl Harbor via Yokosuka, Japan on 3rdAugust 1953.

YORKTOWN arrived too late forimmediate action though, for the Korean armistice had been signedtwo months before. She remained stationed there through to 18thFebruary on training exercises. Thereafter, she returned to HuntersPoint Naval Shipyard for a light upgrade, before being deployed asthe film-set for the movie "Jet Carrier" while she participated inSeventh Fleet maneuvers. Her final act before being placed onreserve at Puget Sound was to assist with the evacuation of ChineseNationalists under Chiang Kai-shek from theChinese mainland. Thereafter, she returned to Puget Sound forfurther modifications. This time these included an angled flightdeck to increase her jet aircraft launchingcapabilities.
From 14th October 1955 onwards YORKTOWN assumed amore peaceful role.Following various tours of duty she wasclassified as an anti-submarine vessel, with new classificationCVS-10. She participated in an American show of strength inresponse to the Communist Chinese shelling of the offshore Taiwanislands of Quemoy and Matsu held by Nationalist Chinese forcesaligned towards the west. She also joined contingency forces offVietnam during the time of internal disorders caused by communistguerrillas. In neither cases was she required to fire a single shotin anger.
For the remainder of her active career, YORKTOWN'Sprimary involvement was representing America's interests in theChina sea. Despite a series of overhauls she became increasinglyout-of-date. In 1970 she was mothballed. Five years followed beforethe Navy approved her donation as a static display at Patriot'sPoint.

THE POINT OF THEDISPLAY
Patriots Pointis located along the waterfront of lovely Charleston Harbor. To getthere, either take the eastbound I-26 on Highway 17, or go southbound on Highway 17. The actual streetaddress is 40 Patriots Point Road, MountPleasant, SC 29464. There you'll see a variety of compellingexhibits, including the mighty aircraft carrieritself.
There she lies tied up alongside a green meadow, which contrastsincongruously with her fearsome appearance, including aircraftlined up on her flight deck and guns bristling. You'll also maybemeet Rear Admiral James H. Flatley III (nowexhibit officer) , whose father, World War II fighter ace James H.Flatley Junior landed the first warplane - an F6F Hellcat - onYORKTOWN some 55 years ago.


Throughout the ship aredisplayed over 104 bronze plaques. These list the names of crewmembers lost in combat. World War II veterans freeze up when theysee a familiar name. A goal of the museum and memorial is to havean equally profound impact on young visitors like Boy Scouts whovisit today.

"We want to create a memorial herethat will also help today's young people to be aware of the cost offreedom," the Rear Admiral says. "We hope to inspire them with asense of honor, valor, and patriotism, things that matter in theircommunities back home. What we give these kids is unique, becauseYorktown is uniquely rich with history. Ourmission, not only just for Scouts camping overnight but for allvisitors too, is to bring to life the history, the heritage, andthe sacrifices of those who served our nation on her, andbequeathed the liberty we enjoy." In this way YORKTOWN's new crew caring for her andpreserving her, seek to make the gigantic museum come alive - ifnot with the sounds and smells of battle,then at least with theirmemories.
WHAT TO SEE AND DO Visitors cannot fail to be impressed by the way the3,000 crewmen lived and worked. Conditions were harsh and spartan.They berthed far down in the bowels of a ship from which there waslittle chance of emergency escape. One also cannot help empathizingwith the young men who gave their all so far away from home. Orunderstand what it was like to fight and die on a deck threefootball fields in length. When you go through the ship you canalmost smell the sweat of the men who served there and willinglyput themselves in the way of danger," the Rear-Admiralconcludes.
Every year over 300,000 visitors tour the YORKTOWNand other Patriot's Point attractions. Nearly 17,000 campers frommore than 500 Scout groups and as many as 32 states spend one ortwo nights aboard the Yorktown annually. "Most Scout groups arefrom the South Eastern States," says Butch Hills. "But we've hadScouts from California, Washington, Michigan, all over the U.S. -and we recently received an e-mail from a troop in Hong Kongwanting to visit too." More than 400 campers from ten Scout troops spentthe night on the Yorktown on a recent weekend. Saturday eveningfeatured a theater program designed to stress God and Country, andthe lessons of Patriotism that the Yorktown experience emphasizes.The next day everyone returned home a starry-eyed winner from theirvisit. Their prize was a greater knowledge of the past, and adeeper appreciation of the meaning of patriotism and the price offreedom.

IN HINDSIGHT

What have we to learn from this, in times when the old enemies ofYORKTOWN and her allies live in peace again? These days Russia,America and Europe stand shoulder-to-shoulder against the modern,deadly threat of terrorism. The war America began in 1942 wasallegedly in response to a cruelly crass attack on unprepared men.In truth though, Japan was on the expansion trail on the Chinesemainland, and Roosevelt was waiting for the opportunity tocounteract it.

Hitler's invasions were all about territory too, and unashamedlyso, although cloaked in patriotic fervor. He was joined in this byMussolini who had similar aspirations. But the world learned littlefrom these foolish things. More recently, Britain went to war withArgentina over a few tiny islands many of her subjects didn't knowthey owned.

While the western world may be gradually realizingthat we have to work together if we are to survive together too,elsewhere the turf war rages on regardless. India and Pakistan arestill staring down each others gun barrels in the Himalayas, whileAfrica is as bad as a hideously overgrown school playground full ofbullies.

I obtained permission to visit YORKTOWN aloneone night, when my only guides were stars above, and a fewemergency lights below. The lone sounds were the gentle creaking ofa resting ship, and my own footfalls. I passed by the bridge infavor the the crew's messing area. The huge galley pots hungsilently from their hooks. The stoves had long gone cold forever.The benches where once sailors sat were empty. Yet, when I listenedcarefully, sounds came back to me that seemed so real. Cheerfulbanter and raucous laughter just like young men, everywheretoday.

Without warning the klaxon sounded. Pounding footsteps ran alongcompanionways and up ladders. Mighty airplane engines vanished intothe night. The ship fell silent. Two voices murmured softly in thenight. "I hope it goes well with Joe," one voice said. "Yep,"another answered. "He mentioned that he did not feel good aboutthis one, and gave me the note he wrote to his wife."

I left mighty YORKTOWN to her slumbers, nodding silently to thesentry who seemed to understand. You see, my dad was a fighterpilot too, and he served on her in 1945. His name was also Joe, andhe did not return from the raid on Kure Naval base on the night of24th July 1945. That was so agonizingly close to the war's end. Iknow, because my Mom handed me his note the night she died, and Ihave it still.


