Downtown Flushing is the largest urban center in Queens, and home to the second largest Chinatown in New York City. Get off the 7 subway or the LIRR at Flushing Main Street and step into the crowds. The downtown sidewalks pulse with people - of all nationalities but predominantly East Asians, specifically Chinese and Koreans. Signs in Chinese are at least as prominent as those in English. This Chinatown, though, is a real American fusion. For food there's everything from McDonald's and Chinese seafood restaurants to street vendors selling fried noodles. For drinks there are Irish bars, Starbucks, and bubble tea cafes. The shopping ranges from the standard Old Navy and upscale Benetton to Chinese bookstores, herbal medicine shops, Asian groceries, and music stores that stock the latest hits from Shanghai.
Chinatown in Flushing is home to a vibrant middle class and blue-collar community, and is wealthier than Chinatown in Manhattan. Until the 1970s Flushing was mostly an Italian and Greek neighborhood, but the downtown was shaken by the economic turmoil of the 1970s. People left Flushing and housing prices dropped. Korean and Chinese immigrants began to settle in Flushing by the late 1970s, and have predominated since the 1980s.
Many of the Chinese arrivals to Flushing have come from Taiwan, Southeast Asia, and even Latin America (from earlier immigrant groups). The representation of the extended Chinese community makes the eating possibilities in Flushing most delicious.
Public Transportation to Flushing: Subway, Train, and Bus The 7 subway serves downtown Flushing with its terminal station on Main Street. The LIRR train on the Port Washington line also stops on Main. Buses connect Flushing to the rest of Queens and also north to the Bronx. The following buses serve Flushing downtown: 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 25, 28, 34, 44, 65, and 66. Driving Directions to Flushing
It is fairly easy to drive to Flushing, but traffic and parking in the downtown can trigger migraines. Northern Boulevard and Main Street are the two most prominent thoroughfares. Exit the Whitestone Expressway (I-678/Van Wyck) at Northern Boulevard. Or exit the LIE (I-495) at Main Street, and drive north for about a mile.
Parking in Downtown Flushing, Queens There is a large municipal lot at 37th Avenue and Union Street. The price is right at this two-level garage. There is smaller municipal lot next to the LIRR at 41 Avenue, just west of Main Street. Another small lot is on Prince Street, between 38 and 39 Avenues, which can often be a nightmare to navigate. There are several private parking lots, like the one across from the Flushing Mall at Prince and 39th Avenue. On a weekday you might get lucky and find a spot on the side streets around the Flushing Mall. The farther you go toward College Point Boulevard (west of Main), the more likely you will find street parking. Residential streets like those east of Union tend to have parking restrictions. Parking on Main Street is for the lucky and the thrill seeking. Watch out for the double-parkers!
Flushing History:
Dutch colonists in the 1620s bought land from the Matinecocks. The colonists signed the Flushing Remonstrance in 1657, petitioning for, and later, securing religious freedom, which foresaw the freedom of religion in the U.S. Constitution. The tongue-tied English took control in 1664, and renamed Vlissingen, the original Dutch name, to Flushing.
A town in the original Queens County, Flushing grew rapidly after joining New York City in 1898. By the 1950s it was Queens' largest commercial district.
Twentieth century and World's Fairs The continued construction of bridges over the Flushing River and the development of other roads increased the volume of vehicular traffic into Flushing. In 1909, the construction of the Queensborough Bridge over the East River connected Queens County to midtown Manhattan.
The introduction of rail road service to Manhattan in 1910 by the Long Island Rail Road Port Washington Branch and in 1928 by the New York City Transit Authority's Number 7 subway line hastened the continued transformation of Flushing to a commuter suburb and commercial center. Due to increased traffic, a main roadway through Flushing named Broadway was widened and renamed Northern Boulevard.
Flushing was a forerunner of Hollywood, when the young American film industry was still based on the East Coast and Chicago. Decades later, the RKO Keith's movie palace would host vaudeville acts and appearances by the likes of Mickey Rooney, The Marx Brothers and Bob Hope. The theater now lies vacant and in disrepair due to an unauthorized real estate development project that took place in the early 1990s.
The 1939-1940 World's Fair was held in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. Massive preparations for the Fair began in 1936 and included the elimination of the Corona dumps. Among the innovations presented to the world in 1939 was the television, which broadcast a speech by Franklin D. Roosevelt.
After the World's Fair, the New York City pavilion was converted into the temporary headquarters of the United Nations where, in 1947, the UN voted in favor of the establishment of the State of Israel.
A second World's Fair, the 1964-1965 World's Fair was also held at the site of the Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. Pope Paul VI attended the Fair on October 4, 1965. On this papal trip, Pope Paul VI became the first pope to visit the United States. An exedra now commemorates the site of the Vatican pavilion. Michelangelo's masterpiece, the Piet , was exhibited during his trip.
Following the Fair, the Unisphere, the New York State Pavilion and the New York City Pavilion remained in the park. The NYC Pavilion was converted into an ice-skating rink and later, the ice rink became the Queens Museum of Art.
Flushing Real Estate and Apartments: Flushing real estate prices have climbed high since the late 1990s. Multiple-family homes, often attached, and apartment buildings dominate. North of Northern and near Kissena Park there are beautiful single-family homes and higher prices (even $1 million+). At the south of downtown are several apartment towers.
Flushing Main Streets and Shopping: Main Street puts most Main Streets to shame with its range of shops from Benetton to Chinese herbalists, from Starbucks to dumpling stands. The heart of downtown--Main south from Northern to Kissena--is a barrage of restaurants, signs, traffic, and people. Don't miss the bargains or noodles at the Flushing Mall (39th Ave at Prince St). Northern Boulevard also bustles, but with less foot traffic. It's an extended Koreatown strip that stretches east through Bayside and into Nassau County.
Green Spaces and Landmarks: Lovely Kissena Park (Oak and Rose Aves) has a lake; playgrounds; basketball, bocce, and tennis courts; wide paths for strolling; golf course; and even a Velodrome. Flushing Meadows-Corona Park is a big hop over College Point Boulevard. Queens Botanical Garden is a small oasis south of downtown. Small Bowne Park (29th Ave and 155th St) is cool with a pond.
Flushing Town Hall isn't a town hall, but a great spot for local art and music. Historic Bowne House (37-01 Bowne St) is closed for repair.
High schools
The five public high schools in Flushing include Francis Lewis High School, John Bowne High School, Robert F. Kennedy Community High School, Townsend Harris High School, the Flushing International High School and Flushing High School, the oldest public high school in the City of New York. Flushing High School is housed in a distinctive Gothic Revival building built between 1912 and 1915 and declared a NYC Landmark in 1991. Private high schools include Holy Cross High School. Townsend Harris High School is a selective high school located on the Queens College campus and was recently ranked by the U.S. News and World Report as one of the best public high schools in the United States.
Higher Education
Queens College, founded in 1937, a senior college of the City University of New York (CUNY) is located between Kissena Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway. The City University of New York School of Law was founded in 1983 adjacent to the Queens College campus. The Law School operates Main Street Legal Services Corp., a legal services clinic.
Crime and Safety in Flushing: Flushing is generally a safe neighborhood. Prostitution is a problem in the downtown. The industrial zone on both sides of Flushing River, especially Willets Point, are not places for walking alone or at night. The 109th Precinct (including College Point) reported the following crimes for the year-to-date (6/12/05): 1 murder (3 in 2004), 11 rapes (6 in 2004), 136 robberies (135 in 2004), 80 felonious assaults (115 in 2004), and 210 burglaries (234 in 2004).
Flushing is a very religiously diverse community in America (if not the most). There are "over 200 places of worship in a small urban neighborhood about 2.5 square miles [6.5 square kilometers].""Flushing has become a model for religious pluralism in America, says R. Scott Hanson, a visiting assistant professor of history at the State University of New York at Binghamton and an affiliate of the Pluralism Project at Harvard University."
In 1657, while Flushing was still a Dutch settlement, a document known as the Flushing Remonstrance was created by Edward Hart, the town clerk, where some thirty ordinary citizens protested a ban imposed by Peter Stuyvesant, the director general of New Amsterdam, forbidding the harboring of Quakers. The Flushing Remonstrance cited the Flushing Town charter of 1645 which promised liberty of conscience.
Today, Flushing abounds in houses of worship, ranging from the Dutch colonial epoch Quaker Meeting House, St. George's Episcopal Church, the Free Synagogue of Flushing, St. Andrew Avellino Roman Catholic Church, St. Nicholas Greek Orthodox Church - the largest Greek Orthodox Church in the United States.
The first series of Charmin toilet paper commercials featuring Mr. Whipple (Dick Wilson) were filmed in Flushing at the Trade Rite supermarket on Bowne Street. The rock band KISS first played at the Coventry Club on Queens Boulevard in 1973, and is said to have derived its name from "Kissena," one of Flushing's major boulevards.
Joel Fleischman, the fictional character from the 1990s comedic drama Northern Exposure, was said to have relocated from Flushing. Often, references were made to actual locations around Main Street, Flushing.
Fran Drescher's character "Fran Fine" on the TV show "The Nanny", was said to have been raised in Flushing, where her family still lived. Drescher herself was born in Flushing.
Flushing was the location of the Stark Industries (later Stark International) munitions plant in Marvel Comics' original Iron Man series.
Ethnic culture
The intersection of Main Street and Roosevelt Avenue, the business center for Flushing located at the terminus of the Number 7 subway line on the westernmost edge of the neighborhood has a concentration of Chinese and Korean small businesses among others. Today, this area is also known for its selection of authentic Chinese, Korean and Asian restaurants.
Other areas of Flushing continue to maintain a large Italian and Greek presence reflected in the many Italian and Greek bakeries, grocery stores and restaurants in the northern and eastern sections of the neighborhood.
An area south of Franklin Avenue is home to an Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi market.
George Washington visited the Prince nurseries with Vice President John Adams. Francis Lewis, signer of the Declaration of Independence a merchant and patriot who lost his wife and gave his fortune to the revolutionary cause, served as vestryman at St. George's Church. Theodore Roosevelt gave a campaign speech from the steps of Flushing Town Hall; in honor of the visit, what had been "Amity Street" was renamed "Roosevelt Avenue", a name it still bears The Ramones often played Flushing's clubs The Beatles, The Who, and other bands played at Shea Stadium
Flushing's Railroad The Flushing Railroad was incorporated in 1852 and completed its line from Hunter's Point to Flushing in 1854. The line ran from Hunter's Point (Long Island City) east to Haberman, then north following close to what are now Maurice and Garfield Aves, then to Winfield and on to Flushing, along the ROW of the current Port Washington branch. After foreclosure in 1859, it became known as the New York and Flushing Railroad.
Thanks to "Big John, fan of the Sunrise Trail" we have this document from 1854, showing a proposal to extend the Flushing RR all the way out to Huntington.
In 1866, a subsidiary, the North Shore RR Co. was created, which extended the NY&F line from Flushing to Great Neck.

In 1869, in order to thwart the South Side's attempts for a ROW to Long Island City, the NY and Flushing was purchased by Oliver Charlick of the LIRR. The Haberman to Winfield portion of the line was abandoned and a new ROW through Woodside was built. A year later, he sold it to Conrad Poppenhusen of the Flushing and North Side RR.

By 1872, Poppenhusen had built his own ROW to Flushing, the Hunter's Point to Haberman portion was taken over by the South Side and the NY and Flushing ceased to exist.
Stations on the Flushing and NY and Flushing were as follows:
Hunter's Point - Originally at the East River in 1854. New station at 51st Ave. and 2nd St. in 1869. Expanded for use by the Central RR in 1872. Taken over by LIRR for Brighton Beach service in 1878. (anyone know anything about this service?) Penny Bridge - 1854 at Laurel hill Blvd. opposite Meeker Ave. Abandoned 1869 when the route was changed. Maspeth - 1855 at 58th. St and 54th Dr. Abandoned 1858 Newtown (Elmhurst) - 1855 Fashion Race Course (then West Flushing when the West Flushing station at 108th St. below was abandoned, then Corona) - 1855 at National Ave. (102nd St.) West Flushing - 1854 at 108th St. Main St. - Flushing Main Street is the northern terminal station on the IRT Flushing Line of the New York City Subway, located at Main Street and Roosevelt Avenue in Flushing. It is a three track, two platform station, completely renovated between 1999 and 2000, and ADA-compliant access has been added. Mosaic tiles read "MAIN STREET"; small tiles along the platforms read "M". The original street exit is in the middle of the platforms with a separate fare control mezzanine above the tracks. The new fare control area at the east end has an extremely high ceiling, approximately 40 feet (12 m) below the street level, and provides an elevator, three escalators, and a stairway to street level at Lippman Plaza. New artwork has been installed over the row of turnstiles. There are two entrances at street level. The main entrance is located in the centre of the platforms and leads the station service mezzanine with a 24-hour station agent's booth. The 2007 passenger count for this station was 17,987,206 - making it the busiest single subway station in the borough of Queens.
The new Lippmann Plaza entrance opened in 1999 and is located at the far east end of the station, beyond the end of the tracks at the bumper blocks. Prior to 1999, the tracks went past where the current bumper blocks are to make a dead-end. The new entrance has stairs, an escalator, and an ADA-accessible elevator. This station is one of the three on the IRT Flushing Line that is accessible to the disabled. Flushing Main Street Station has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places since 2004.
At the west end of the station platforms are the offices and dispatch tower for the Flushing Line. This is where the trains are dispatched, crews report, and the line is controlled from.
Major highways that serve the area include the Van Wyck Expressway, Whitestone Expressway, Grand Central Parkway and Long Island Expressway. Northern Boulevard extends from the Queensboro Bridge in Long Island City through Flushing into Nassau County.
Flushing Restaurants, Bakeries, and Markets: Flushing is a mecca of Asian dining, especially Chinese and Korean, and it's not as well-known as it should be for Indian food. Spiced and priced for local residents, Flushing restaurants are a foodie's delight. Make sure to try the bubble tea and Chinese bakeries.
Gum Fong (136-28 39th Ave) serves dim sum by day and Cantonese dishes in the evening. Next to a Hindu temple, Dosa Hutt (45-63 Bowne St) is the best place in Queens for the quintessential south Indian snack/meal of dosas.
