Working out to sweat more in summer season may be good for you, yet that can lead to heat stroke to your favorite pet killing him in minutes time. Heat stroke is a dangerous condition that takes animals' lives yearly and Heat stroke is a condition arising from extremely high body temperature, which leads to nervous system abnormalities that may include lethargy, weakness, collapse or coma. Your pet's normal body temperature is 99.5 to 102.5 degrees Fahrenheit. The pet is at risk for heat exhaustion if the body temperature rises to 105 or 106 degrees. And if the body temperature rises to 107 degrees, your pet is in the heat stroke's dangerous zone, which can cause irreversible damage and death.


Heat-related illnesses such as heat stroke, heat exhaustion, and heat cramps can occur after being exposed to extremely high environmental temperatures. These illnesses can be prevented to occur in all mammals if proper precautions are to be implemented.

Animals at greatest risk for heat-related illness include:

Puppies up to 6 months of age Black dogs and cats (black color retains heat) Dogs overexerted during exercise Overweight dogs
Dogs that are ill or receiving certain medications
Brachycephalic breeds (has short, wide heads like pugs, English bulldogs, Boston terriers) Dogs with obstructive airway diseases
Dehydrated dogs
Dogs with pre-existing fever Dogs with heart disease
Dogs with poor circulation due to cardiovascular or other underlying disease
Old pets (large breed dogs over 7 years of age, small breed dogs over 14 years of age)
Dogs with a history of seizures


If your pet shows any of these signs, you must treat it as an emergency and immediately call your veterinarian. While on your way to the vet hospital, try cooling down your pet with wet towels, spray with cool water from a hose or if your pet is conscious, you can as well provide him ice chips to chew. Follow-up Checking


A thorough treatment for your pet dog requires both of home and professional veterinary care. So, follow-up is crucial. Don't forget to administer any medications prescribed by your veterinarian and should you experience problems in treating your dog, contact your veterinarian as soon as possible.


After 3 to 7 days, your dog should be re-examined to evaluate the serum biochemical tests and an electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) if arrhythmias were detected during hospitalization. Always watch your dog's activity level and appetite and monitor his skin for bruising and gums for pinpoint hemorrhages.

The actual follow-up procedure will greatly depend on the severity of your dog's heat illness, therapy response, and the veterinarian's recommendations.
-- (even with the windows partially ro lled down) for any reason at any time-- for it is the most common cause of heat stroke TAKING CARE A PREGNANT PET
Before delivery: Nutrition should be given an importance too during pregnancy. For the first six week feed your dog her normal amount of food, then, gradually increase the amount during the final three weeks so your dog's caloric intake reaches its normal amount. However, you should always consult your vet when feeding and what to feed your pet. During pregnancy, like humans, pregnant dogs as well require regular exercise to control her weight, for overweight dogs may have problems during the delivery. She may go for a walk or chase a ball or Frisbee. While your dog is pregnant, she needs regular worm preventives and flea control. You can consult your veterinarian if what parasite control products are appropriate for your pet. Occasional mucus vaginal discharges during pregnancy is normal even if this discharge is pink-tinged. However, if you notice blood or pus in the discharge, immediately see your veterinarian for it might be indicating pregnancy complications.
A few weeks before her delivery, you should start selecting a safe and secluded area where you can provide a box that your dog can deliver her puppies in. That box should have a rail around it where the puppies can move under preventing the mother from crushing them accidentally. Line the box with clean rugs or blankets to provide puppies good footing for nursing and crawling, which would help their legs and feet develop properly. Lastly, don't forget to introduce the dog to the box before giving birth, for her to get acclimated.
During delivery: The first stage of labo r lasts for two to 12 hours and this is where the cervix dilates and the.uterus starts to contract regularly. Your dog may show signs of nervousness, nesting ,shivering, panting, vomiting, and loss of appetite. The second stage of labor is when your dog starts experiencing stronger contractions and expels watery fluid. How puppies are expelled:
- The first puppy will enter the dog's pelvic canal, stimulating her to push more aggressively.
- The dog will break the thin, whitish membrane surrounding the puppy as each puppy is expelled,
- You should remove the said membrane from the puppies' nostrils right after birth to avoid suffocation.
- The puppies' normal delivery interval is between 30 to 60 minutes. Rest periods are normal though, especially if your dog would be delivering a large litter and during these rest periods, your dog seems to be comfortable.
During the third stage of labor, your dog will expel the placentas. She may eat the placentas and chew the umbilical cords: these provide her protein and other nutrients. The placentas usually follow each pup, but the passing of a placenta may be interrupted when another pup is delivered. If you see a vaginal discharge containing pus shortly after she delivers, immediately consult your vet because it may indicate that her placentas are retained inside. After delivery You may notice a vaginal discharge after delivery. Your dog will expel most of the discharge in the first two weeks, yet you may see small amounts over the following four to six weeks. You should observe the amount of the discharge and its color from red to brown, and a change in consistency from watery to mucoid (resembling mucus). Consult your vet if you notice an odor or blood in the discharge. Mammary glands that produce and provide colostrum and milk for the puppies should be examined everyday. Ask you vet on how to apply hot compresses or perform milk stripping two to four times a day to avoid having mammary problems. Let your vet examine the puppies as soon as they're being delivered and they should be ingested by colostrum within 24 hours. The puppies should gain weight daily, so weigh the puppies every day and record their weight gain. If weight loss or the absence of weight gain observed, consult your veterinarian.
You should regulate your Puppies cannot regulate their body temperatures, so you must keep them warm for the first two weeks of life. Drafts pose the greatest threat for puppies. You can provide supplemental heat sources, such as heating pads or heat lamps on low thermostat settings. Just make sure the puppies can get away from the heat source to avoid becoming too hot. The puppies should remain with their mother during the first several weeks; she will feed them, help keep them warm, stimulate them to urinate and defecate, and teach them appropriate canine interactions.

SPAY & NEUTER
Meaning


Spaying is the removal of the female dogs and cats' reproductive organs, while neutering are the removal of male dogs and cats' testicles. The operation for both is performed while pets are under anesthesia and the procedures depend upon on your pet's age, size, and health. You can ask your vet for a full explanation of spay and neuter procedures and as to when is the best age at which you can sterilize your pet. Health Benefits


There are several benefits spaying can give not only to your pets but for you as their caretaker as well.
If you pets are spayed, there's no need for them to roam around outside your yard to look for a mate. Therefore, they will just stay at home avoiding the chance of being hit by a car.
Pets will also lower the incidence of getting into fights with other dogs and get contagious diseases. In Females, spaying decreases the incidence of breast cancer and the rate can actually go down to almost zero if the spaying is done before the first heat cycle. Spaying in females eliminates the chance of developing a serious and potentially fatal infection of the uterus.
Spay surgery eliminates the heat cycle, associated mood swings, undesirable behaviors, messy spotting, and the attraction to all the males available in your yard. In males, neutering decreases the chances of developing prostatic disease and hernias, and developing testicular cancer.
Neutering as well reduces problems with territorial and sexual aggression, inappropriate urination (spraying) and other undesirable male behaviors. ADVANTAGES of Spaying and Neutering
to You: Spaying and neutering makes pets feel better, become more affectionate companion. Spaying a dog or cat eliminates heat cycle ignoring unwanted male dogs.
Spaying and neutering can make pets bite less.
Neutering lessens pets' wanting to roam the neighborhood, run away, or get into fights. to your Pet: Spaying and neutering helps dogs and cats have a longer and healthier lives. Spaying and neutering can reduce or eliminate a number of health problems that are difficult and expensive to cure. The possibility of uterine or ovarian cancer and breast cancer to spayed females greatly reduces. Neutering decreases the incidence of prostate disease and eliminates testicular cancer to the Community: Will let the communities save spending millions in controlling unwanted animals. Will lessen the problem of dog bites and attacks especially rabies. Will lessen stray defecate in public areas or on private lawns


