It's fun to build a fence as you're out in the fresh air, the project goes quickly, and it gives you a chance to gab with your neighbors.

Ornamental Iron and Aluminum Fences

The traditional ornamental wrought iron is still one of the most beautiful and decorative options. It is a custom built fence. It is extremely decorative and at the same time it is one of the strongest and sturdiest fences available. It is common to see these as security fences designed to accommodate automatic door openers and other security systems. Ornamental steel matches iron in strength and it is hot dipped galvanized and powder coated. So, it does not have problems with rust. Ornamental aluminum is extremely attractive, and made with an aluminum alloy that rivals iron and steel in strength.



In most communities, you don't need a permit to build a fence that's off the property line and 6 feet high or less. But you must check your local building codes to be sure . Talk to your neighbors before anything is actually set in concrete. By doing so, you might save yourself a lot of grief.
First-rate, rot-resistant fence wood is difficult to come by, but it's easy to find pressure-treated lumber, which has had rot-resisting chemicals forced into it under pressure. Make sure that any part of that touches the ground has a .40 retention rating. This indicates that the chemical treatment is strong enough to protect wood in constant contact with soil or concrete. lay out the fence, mark and dig the post holes, set the posts, trim the post tops, add the rails, add the inner frames and boards

White Cedar Boards vs. Red Cedar and Treated Boards for fences


In today's marketplace, it is not always easy for consumers to make educated decisions. With the multitude of stores selling treated or Red Cedar materials, it is easy to assume that it is the best option for building a fence. Unfortunately, the consumers do not realize how untrue it is.

Treated boards are certainly the least expensive and it is because of this reason so many stores prefer to offer it. However, as most people know, you get what you pay for. In terms of Red Cedar, there are a multitude of disadvantages in using it. Red Cedar mainly grows in Oregon. It is a larger tree and at the same time it is darker in color. With the passage of time, Red Cedar will fade to almost black. Red Cedar does not have a natural preventative and therefore, it's lifespan is much shorter. Red Cedar's grain is very different from that of White Cedar. Its grain promotes splitting and checking in the boards.

Northern White Cedar boards consist of cells that absorb very little water. It has natural inhibitors to fight off rot and decay. As a matter of fact, White Cedar is one of the more stable woods. It will shrink less than one percent, and rarely warps, twists or cups which is quite unlike treated wood, generally made from Yellow Pine, and famous for all threeunwanted characteristics.

According to the US Forestry Service, treated wood is no better than White Cedar at withstanding the rigors of Ohio weather

Just as a wooden ship is constructed with a variety of wood species for a purpose, your wood fence can also benefit from using a variety of species. In other words, treated materials do have a place in the construction of a fence. MicroPro treated wood for the posts , preferably made of Red Pine is recommended.


Mason's line Hoe Hand sledge Chalk line Tape measure Line level Plumb bob Circular saw or miter saw Post-hole digger Drill Shovel Drill-bit set Pick Combination square Safety glasses Two quick-action clamps, 6-inch capacity Level Nailset Hammer Sawhorses Wheelbarrow
1. Lay out the fence . Locate the ends of the fence to drive sturdy stakes or pipes where the end posts should be and stretch a mason's line between the stakes. Additional stakes will be required every 15 feet and make sure that these are aligned with the end stakes. Stretch the mason's line from one stake to the other. It should be at a height of 3 feet or so above the ground and it should be wrapped around each stake in the same direction. Once it is done, the line should be straight and run along the same face of each stake.
2. Mark and dig the post holes .
Using a tape measure and felt-tip marker, mark post locations on the mason's line. Posts can be spaced every 6 feet. Use a plumb bob to plumb these marks down to earth. Mark the post centers on the ground with spray paint. Once the post locations have been set, dig the post holes to make each hole 2 feet deep and 1 foot wide. Note that hand diggers can handle roots up to a half-inch or so, and power diggers can munch through bigger roots and small rocks. Also keep a pick and shovel handy as you'll need it when an inevitable big rock or root bars your way. Remember to wear safety glasses when breaking up rock or using a power digger.
3. Set the posts . 6 inches of gravel should be added to each hole. Then place a 4-by-4 post loosely inside it. Seat each post into the gravel and plumb it with a carpenter's level so that the post face is at least 1/4 inch away from the mason's line above. Using one face of the post as a guide, drive a foundation stake diagonally into the dirt near the top of the hole. Hammer an 8d double-headed nail through the stake into the post. Drive in a second foundation stake at a right angle to the first and nail it to the post.The foundation stakes allow you to do the job single-handedly. Ensure that each post is 6 feet apart from its neighbors. When this has been done, fill the holes with fence post mix, which already contains cement and aggregate. All that you have to do is add water. This can easily be done in a wheelbarrow. Just pour in a bag of fence post mix and add water gradually. Stir with a hoe till you get the right consistency. Tamp the concrete well with a stick or rod and let it cure overnight. Remove the double-headed nails from the posts and pull out the foundation stakes. Top off the holes with concrete an inch or two above the ground, sloping the outer rim downward from the post so that water will drain away from the wood. Aggregate pressed into the wet concrete at the base of a post improves its appearance.
4. Trim the post tops. When all the posts have been securely set, stretch a chalk line across them and place a line level at its center. Adjust the line to trim all the posts level at about 1/4 inch below the top of the shortest post. Remove the line level, and snap the chalk line to mark the posts.
5. Add the rails . Nail 2-by- 4 top rails into place with 16d galvanized box nails. To minimize the number of joints in the top rails, use 12-foot or 14-foot 2-by-4s. The place where the pieces meet atop a post, align them so that their ends center over the posts, preferably at a 45 degree angle so as to protect the end grain and minimize weathering. Mark and cut the lower rails. The rails will last longer if they are at least 6 inches above the ground. Level the rails with the longest level you have and use a combination square to mark rail locations on the posts. To keep rails from wandering as you toenail them, clamp a scrap-wood stop block to the post.
6. Add the inner frames and boards.

The boards run vertically between posts and rails within a frame of 1-by-1s and these frames act as stops for the fence boards so that they don't wander when you nail them in. Add an upper stop first. Measure and cut it to fit between the posts, and predrill nail holes in it every 6 inches. Set your combination square to measure 5/8 inch in from one edge of the upper rail, and then use the square to position the upper stop. Nail the stop into its place and sink the nail heads by using a nail-set .

Measure and cut 1-by-6 fence boards to fit between the upper and lower rails. Lay them across sawhorses, mark them with a combination square, and then cut them with a saw. To make the edges of the boards meet, just plumb the first one and start nailing them into place while checking plumb periodically. Generally, the final board in a fence section will need to be cut. For this, a table saw is best.



Tape Measure
Level
Pliers
Wire Cutters
Sledge Hammer
Post Hole Digger
Wheelbarrow, Shovel and Hoe to Mix and Transport Concrete
Hacksaw or Pipe Cutter
String / Mason Line and Stakes
Crescent Wrench
Fence Stretcher (ratchet type power pull or a block and tackle device may be used. Most wire stretching tools can easily be borrowed or locally rented.)

1. Survey Property Lines

Be sure that your fence does not exceed property lines in any direction.This can be done by stretching a string along the property line.

2. Locate and set Terminal Posts

Distance between gate posts is determined by adding the actual width of the gate plus an allowance for hinges and latches. Usually walk gates require 3 3/4" for hinges and latches and double drive gates require 5 1/2". Dig the holes. Terminal posts should be set 2" higher as compared to the height of the fence fabric and line posts 2" lower as compared to the the height of the fence fabric (terminal posts should be 4" higher than the line posts). Set the terminal posts in concrete using a concrete mix. You can use 1 part cement, 2 parts sand and 4 parts gravel. There is also pre-mix cement. Use a level to ensure that the posts are straight. Posts should be centered in the hole. Crown the posts footings so the water will drain away from the posts.

3. Locate and set Line Posts

After the concrete around the terminal posts has hardened, stretch a string tight between the terminal posts in such a manner that the string is 4" below the top of the terminal posts. Line posts should not be spaced more than 10 feet apart. Dig the post holes and set the line posts like terminal posts. Before the concrete begins to set, adjust the post height by moving the post up or down. Ensure that the op of the line posts is even with the string. Check with level in order to make sure that posts are straight.

4. Apply Fittings to Terminal Posts Check material list and fittings chart above. After all the posts have been installed and the concrete footings have hardened, slip the tension and brace bands onto the terminal posts. The long flat surface of the tension band should face towards the outside of the fence. Take care not to spread or distort the fittings. After this, you may apply terminal post caps.

5. Apply Top Rail Attach loop caps to line posts. Insert one length of top rail pipe through the eye-top closest to one of the terminal post. Slide a rail end onto the end of the top rail and attach it to a termianl post by using the brace band . Secure the rail end to the brace band with the help of a carriage bolt. Continue by attaching top rails together. In case the swedged top rail is not used, the rail ends may be connected together by making use of top rail sleeve. Upon reaching the other terminal post, measure carefully and cut the top rail so that it fits tightly into the rail end. Secure rail end to the terminal post with brace band and carriage bolt. 6. Hang Chain Link Fabric

Unroll the chain link fabric on the ground along the fence line. Slide tension bar through the last link on the chain link fabric. Stand the fabric up and lay it against the posts. Fasten the tension bar which had been inserted to the terminal post with tension bands. Use carriage bolts with head to the outside of the fence. Walk along the fence and take the slack out. Attach the fabric loosely to the top rail with a few wire ties.

In order to connect two sections or rolls of the fence fabric together take a single strand of wire from one of the sections of fence and place the two sections of fence next to each other. Join the two sections by winding the loose strand down through the fence in a corkscrew fashion. Join and tighten the knuckles at bottom and top. As a result, you will not be able to see where the two sections were connected together.

The excess chain link fence fabric can be removed if you untie both top and bottom ends of fence. Twist the wire in a corkscrew fashion until the fence comes apart.

7. Stretch Chain Link Fabric

Fabric should be fastened to the opposite end of the fence. Insert a tension bar approximately 3 feet inside the unattached end of the fabric. Fasten one end of the fence stretcher to the tension bar and the other end to the terminal post. Stretch the fabric in such a manner that the correct tension should allow a slight amount of give when squeezed by hand. The top of the fabric should be located approximately 1/2" above the top rail. Adjust fabric to the required length by adding or removing wire as mentioned in the previous step. Insert a tension bar at the end of the fabric and connect the tension bands on the terminal post. Remove the fence stretcher. Attach wire ties to the top rail 24" apart. Attach wire ties to the posts 12" apart. Tighten all the nuts.

8. Hanging Gates

After the fence has been completed, install the male hinges to one of the gate posts in such a manner that the top hinge hangs with the pin pointing downward and the bottom hinge with the pin pointing upward. This will prevent the gate from being lifted off. Set gate in place while aligning the top of the gate with the top of fence. Adjust and tighten the hinges to allow for full swing. Install a gate latch in case of a single gate. Double gates use the same procedure but the latching device is installed at the center.
Note: Post depth can be determined by local weather and soil conditions. The terminal posts are normally dug 10" wide and 18" to 30" deep. Depending upon the wind and the soil conditions you may use 8' centers or even a narrower spacing for the line posts. If you wish to add privacy slats in the future, make sure the frame work is strong enough for additional wind load.



5. To prevent wood from splitting while nailing into it, drill pilot holes using a drill bit that's slightly more than half the thickness of the nail shank. For 16d nails, use a 1/8-inch bit; for 8d nails, use a 3/32-inch bit. The type of wood you're using and the distance from the edge ultimately determines whether the wood will split or not. If your work-piece splits even after you've drilled pilot holes, increase your drill bit size incrementally until you find one that can keep the wood intact.

1. Can I build a fence on my land, that is away from the boundary?

Yes, you can build a fence inside your boundary and at your expense. In such a case you will not need the agreement of the neighbour to do so but the law may allow a person to make a claim for ownership of the land that they have occupied for a length of time.

2. What should I do if I want to build a new fence on the boundary?

Before the fence is built you should discuss your plans with your neighbor and try to reach an agreement about the type of fence, the cost and the boundary to be fenced before starting the work.

3. How can I make my neighbor share the cost of building the fence?

Before you start building the fence, you must give your neighbor a written notice. The notice need not be on a special form. It must have information about where the fence will be built, the kind of fence, a plan and the cost of the fence. Give your neighbor a copy of the notice to fence either personally or by sending the notice by registered post.

4. If I pay for all of the fence, do I need my neighbor's permission?

No, you do not need your neighbor's permission to build a new fence either on your land or on the boundary, but at the same time it would be good for neighbourly relations to let your neighbours know of your intention to build a fence.

5. The fence has been built but now the If there is a dispute between you and your neighbour about the payment, you should try to come to an agreement first by mediation but if it does not work, you can take legal action against them.

6. The bordering property is owned by the government or a property developer. Do they have to pay towards the cost of the fence?

State, commonwealth, and local Governments are not bound to pay. Developers of land are bound by the law if they are the owners of the land being developed.

7. Who has to pay for the cost of repairing a fence damaged by an accident?

If the dividing fence is destroyed by an accident then you can repair the fence immediately without notifying the other owner. The cost of the repairs has to be shared equally and you can take the neighbour to court if the neighbor refuses to pay. Accidents include damage caused by cyclones, floods, lightning, fires, and storms.

8. Who has to pay for the cost of repairing a fence damaged by negligence?

If you were responsible for the damage to the fence by your negligence then you will have to pay for the cost of repairing the fence.