People nowadays are taking initiatives to invest their savings for their future. They want to save in order for them to retire from work earlier. However, investing is easy if you have money , what's difficult is to decide what strategy one may use to give the guarantee of having a quality life in the golden years.

There comes the so called Annuities - a financial investment vehicles that should be considered by all. Annuities are This insurance company guaranteed a certain return amount and rate of interest. The amount payable by the investor is most often decided by his or her life expectancy. Whether you are a fresher and just starting your professional career, or having been working for a few years now or are ready to retire, annuities offer interesting and favorable terms and conditions for all.

The most frequent use of income payments from an annuity is for retirement. An annuity is not a life insurance nor a health insurance policy rather not a savings account nor a savings certificate; thus, you shouldn't buy an annuity for short-term purposes.



Now, instead of asking, "Why should we all invest in annuities?" one should be asking "Why not?" You may take time pondering on these some valuable answers. Annuity offers a higher interest rate compare to that of savings account or by investing in CDs.
From the conservative investor to those who are willing to take moderate risks, annuities offer something for everyone that would best suit your needs.
Since tax is deferred on most annuities, you will not be paying your taxes yearly on your investment rather will pay them only when you receive income from the annuity or make a withdrawal from it. That's why your investment will grow better and faster. You can avail Annuities through a one-time payment or by regular payments, whichever you can afford.
It is also possible to hold a joint annuity to secure your partner's financial future.

Annuities are worth considering and investing in for all. It is advisable to contact an annuity broker who will be able to assess your financial situation and help your decide how to invest your money in annuities.

There are different kinds of annuities and it is important to understand the differences among various annuities so you can choose the kind that best fits your needs.



A good savings scheme should offer investors flexibility, versatility, stability and a good rate of interest. Annuities rate well on all these factors. The different types of annuities include the following:

Individual or Group

An individual contract is an annuity that covers only one or two persons.


This type of annuity is ideal for the conservative investor who wants a safe way of saving money without much risk. During the accumulation period of a fixed deferred annuity, premiums (less any applicable charges) earn interest at rates set by the company or in a way spelled out in the annuity contract. Fixed annuities offer investors a fixed rate of interest for a set period of time. The rate of interest may be revised after the guaranteed period is over and the premium for the fixed annuity may be a one-time payment or multiple contributions may be allowed.Also, it includes equity-indexed annuities, which are valued on the basis of performance of a specific stock index yet offer a minimum rate of interest.



The company guarantees that it will pay no less than a minimum rate of interest. During the payout phase, the amount of each income payment you receive is generally set when the payments start and does not change. During the accumulation period of a variable annuity, premiums (less any applicable charges) are put into a separate account of the insurance company. You decide how those premiums will be invested, from stock or bond mutual fund choices. The value of the separate account, and therefore, the value of your variable annuity, varies with the investment experience of the funds you choose. There is no guarantee that you will receive all of your premiums back. There is also no guarantee that you will earn any return on your annuity. During the payout period of a variable annuity, the amount of each income payment you receive may be fixed (predetermined) or variable (changing with the value of the investments in the separate account)



Variable annuities offer a range of investments including stocks and bonds. The rate of interest in variable annuities is usually uncertain and the level of risk is much higher as compared to fixed annuities.



Immediate This type of annuities offers the investor the option of receiving payments from the annuity soon after the premium is paid, which means

an immediate annuity begins to make income payments after you pay the premium. The time after income payments start is called the "payout" period.

The income payments from a deferred annuity start later, often many years later. Deferred annuities have an "accumulation" period, which is the time between when you start paying premiums and when income payments start.




Deferred Annuities

The payment from deferred annuities occurs at a later date, which may coincide with the investor's retirement. Thus, this kind of annuity is particularly useful for people who want to use their investments in deferred annuities for their retirement plan and also for people who want to save money and defer tax for quite a while.



Fixed Period Annuities

As the name implies, the fixed period annuity is for a predetermined time span after annuity payment is made.



Life Annuities

This kind of annuity provides the investor a chance to receive income from the investment for the rest of her/his life. If the annuity is held jointly, then in the event of the death of a spouse, the other can continue to receive regular income from the annuity.


Single Premium Annuities and Flexible Premium Annuities



You pay the insurance company only one premium for a single premium annuity --

the single premium annuity requires payment of one lump sum amount. It may be a deferred single premium annuity or an immediate single premium annuity. In contrast, flexible premium annuities allows the investor to make regular contribution to the annuity.


They offer individuals a chance to invest money in accordance with their particular financial situation.

One kind is the flexible premium contract . With this,you can pay as much as you want, whenever you want, within set limits. The other kind is a scheduled premium contract , this specifies how much your premiums will be and how often you will pay them.




An equity-indexed annuity is a fixed annuity, which is either immediate or deferred, earning interest or providing benefits that are linked to an external equity reference or an equity index. It is a special type of contract between an investor and an insurance company. The value of any index varies from day to day and is not predictable, however.


When you buy an equity-indexed annuity, you own an insurance contract. You are not buying shares of any stock of index.

During the accumulation period, when you make either a lump sum payment or a series of payments, the insurance company credits you with a return that is based on changes in an equity index, such as the S&P 500 Composite Stock Price Index. Typically, the insurance company guarantees a minimum return, which rates vary. After the accumulation period, the insurance company will make periodic payments to you under the terms of your contract unless you choose to receive your contract value through lump sum.

What makes equity-indexed annuity differ from other fixed annuities is the way it credits interest to the value of your annuity.


Your equity-indexed annuity, like other fixed annuities, promises to pay a minimum interest rate. The rate that will be applied will not be less than this minimum guaranteed rate even if the index-linked interest rate is lower. Also. the annuity's value won't drop below a guaranteed minimum. Equity-indexed annuities credit interest through a formula based on changes in the index to which the annuity is linked. That formula decides how the additional interest, if any, is calculated and credited. The additional interest you'll get and when you'll get it depends on the features of your particular annuity. Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract while other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company.




Equity-indexed annuities combine features of traditional insurance products (guaranteed minimum return) and traditional securities (return linked to equity markets). Depending on the mix of features, an equity-indexed annuity may or may not be a security. Typically, equity-indexed annuity is not registered with the SEC.


Losing Your Money


If you cancel you annuity prior to its maturity contract, you can lose your money. Even if you have a guarantee, you can still lose money if your guarantee is based on an amount that is less than the full amount of your purchase payments. In many cases, it will take several years for an equity-index annuity's minimum guarantee to break even.

Also, if you cancel early, you may have to pay a huge surrender charge and tax penalties. In some cases, insurance companies may not credit you with index-linked interest if you don't hold your contract to maturity.


Contract Features


Equity-indexed annuities are complicated products that may contain several features that can affect your return. You should fully understand how an equity-indexed annuity computes its index-linked interest rate before you buy. An insurance company may credit you with a lower return than the actual indexs gain.

Two features that have the greatest effect on the amount of additional interest that may be credited to an equity-indexed annuity are the indexing method and the participation rate. It is important to understand the features and how they work together. The following describes some other equity-indexed annuity features that affect the index-linked formula.



Some common features used to compute an equity-indexed annuitys interest rate include: Participation Rates. The participation rate determines how much of the indexs increase will be used to compute the index-linked interest rate.

For example, if the calculated change in the index is 9% and the participation rate is 70%, the index-linked interest rate for your annuity will be 6.3% (9% x 70% = 6.3%).


An insurance company may set a different participation rate for newly issued annuities as often as each day.So, your annuity's initial participation rate will depend on when the company issued it. Usually, the company guarantees the participation rate for a specific period from one year to the entire contract term. The company will then set a new rate for the next period, when the previous period is done. Some annuities guarantee that the participation rate will never be set lower than a specified minimum or higher than a specified maximum.


, which is the maximum rate of interest to be earned by the annuity.

Looking at the example given above, if the contract has a 6% cap rate, 6%, and not 6.3%, would be credited. Not all annuities have a cap rate though.



Margin/Spread/Administrative Fee. In some annuities, the index-linked interest rate is determined by subtracting a percentage from calculated change in the index.

This percentage is sometimes referred to as the "margin," "spread," or "administrative fee," might be instead of, or in addition to, a participation rate.

In the case of an annuity with a spread of 3%, if the index gained 9%, the return credited to the annuity would be 6% (9% - 3% = 6%).

The company subtracts the percentage only if the change in the index produces a positive interest rate.

Floor. The floor is the minimum index-linked interest rate you will earn. The most common floor is 0%. A 0% floor assures that even if the index decreases in value, the index-linked interest that you earn will be zero and not negative.




Indexing Method


Another feature that can have a dramatic impact on an equity-indexed annuity's return is its indexing method

The indexing method means the approach used to measure the amount of change, if any, in the index.

Some common indexing methods are: Annual Reset (or Ratchet) . This credits index-linked interest based on any increase in index value from the beginning until the year ends.

Interest is added to your annuity each year during the term.

Your annuity using the annual reset method may credit more interest than annuities using other methods when the index fluctuates up and down often during the term. It is because the interest earned is "locked in" annually and the index value is "reset" at the end of each year, future decreases in the index will not affect the interest you have already earned .

Downside: your annuity's participation rate may change each year and generally will be lower than that of other indexing methods. Also an annual reset design may use a cap or averaging to limit the total amount of interest you might earn each year.


High Water Mark. This credits index-linked interest based on any increase in index value from the index level at the beginning of the contracts term to the highest index value at various points during the contract's term, usually on annual anniversaries of when you purchased your annuity.

Interest is added to your annuity at the end of the term.

Interest is calculated using the highest value of the index on a contract anniversary during the term, and this design may credit higher interest than some other designs if the index reaches a high point early or in the middle of the term, then drops off at the end of the term.

Downside: Interest is not credited until the end of the term. Also, contracts with this design may have a lower participation rate than annuities using other designs or may use a cap to limit the total amount of interest you might earn.


Point-to-Point. The index-linked interest, if any, is based on the difference between the index value at the end of the term and the index value at the start of the term. Interest is added to your annuity at the end of the term.

Use of this design may permit a higher participation rate compare to other annuities using other designs because interest can't be calculated before the term's end.


Downside: The interest is not credited until the end of the term, which is typically six or seven years. That means you may not be able to get the index-linked interest until the end of the term



These and other features may be included in an equity-indexed annuity you are planning to put your money on. Before deciding, you should understand how each feature works and what impact, together with other features, it may have on the annuity's potential return.


If there is a product feature that you don't understand, ask your agent. If you still don't understand, send the company a letter telling them that you want a written response so you can study their reply.


TAKING MONEY OUT DURING THE TERM

In most cases, taking all or part of your money out of a deferred annuity at any time during the term is possible. However, as mentioned, you'll be charged by doing it. Sometimes the cost is a stated dollar amount. In other cases, you give up index-linked interest on the amount withdrawn. And in some annuities, you are not allowed to make a partial withdrawal until the term ends.

Usually, a withdrawal charge is a percentage of the amount being withdrawn, and that percentage may be reduced or eliminated after the annuity has been in force for a certain number of years. Sometimes the charge is a reduction in the interest rate that is to be credited to the annuity.

Some annuities credit none of the index-linked interest or only part of it if you take out all your money before your contract's maturity. Generally, the percentage that is vested, or credited, increases as the term comes closer to its end and is always 100% at the end of the term.
OTHER EQUITY-INDEXED ANNUITY CONTRACT BENEFITS Annuity Income Payments

One of the most important benefits of deferred annuities is the right to use the value built up during the accumulation period to provide income payments in the payout period. Although income payments are usually made monthly, you can often choose more or less frequent payments. The income payments' size is based on both the accumulated value in your annuity and the annuity's "benefit rate" that is in effect when income payments start.

The insurance company uses the benefits rate in computing the amount of income payment it will pay you for every $1,000 of accumulated value in your annuity. Usually, the benefit rate depends on your age and sex, and the form of annuity payment you have chosen. You might choose payments that continue as long as you live, or as long as either you or your spouse live, or payments that continue for a set number of years. Death Benefit

Annuities provide a variety of death benefits and the most common is either the guaranteed minimum value or the value determined by the index-linked formula. Tax Deferral

Tax deferral advantage is that you'll probably be in a lower tax bracket in retirement compare to when you are employed. Also, during the accumulation period, you will be earning interest on money that you would otherwise have used to pay taxes. Tax-qualified annuities are subject to different rules. In any case, you should consult your own tax advisor. Federal income tax on interest accumulated in an annuity is deferred until you take the interest out of the annuity. You may be required to pay taxes then on the tax-deferred accumulation, and may have to pay a tax penalty if you withdraw the accumulation before you are age 59½.

IS AN EQUITY-INDEXED ANNUITY RIGHT FOR YOU?

You should first consider what your goals are for the money you may put into the annuity. You need to think about how much risk you're willing to take with the money. The questions listed below may help you decide which type of annuity, if any, meets your retirement planning and financial needs: What do I expect to use the money for in the future? Am I interested in a variable annuity with the potential for higher earnings that are not guaranteed and willing to risk losing the principal? How long can I leave my money in the annuity? Is a guaranteed interest rate more important to me, with little or no risk of losing the principal? Or, am I somewhere in between these two extremes and willing to take some risks?

No single annuity design may have all the features you want as with any other insurance product. Thus, you must carefully consider your own personal situation and how you feel about the choices offered. You must decide for yourself what combination of features makes the most sense for you. It is important to understand the features and trade-offs, so you can choose the annuity that is right for you. Keep in mind that it may be misleading to compare one annuity to another unless you compare all the other features of each annuity. Also, remember that it is not possible to predict the future market behavior of an index. QUESTIONS YOU SHOULD ASK YOUR AGENT OR THE COMPANY How long is the term? Does my contract have a cap? What is the guaranteed minimum interest rate? What annuity income payment options do I have? What charges, if any, are deducted from my premium? What charges, if any, are deducted from my contract value? What are the surrender charges or penalties if I want to end my contract early and take out all of my money? What is the participation rate? For how long is the participation rate guaranteed? Is there a minimum participation rate? Is averaging used? How does it work? Which indexing method is used in my contract? Is interest compounded during a term? Is there a margin, spread, or administrative fee? Is that in addition to or instead of a participation rate? Can I get a partial withdrawal without paying charges or losing interest? Does my contract have vesting? Does my annuity waive withdrawal charges if I am confined to a nursing home or diagnosed with a terminal illness? What is the death benefit?


It is very important that you choose an annuity that you understand well, so don't be afraid to ask your agent or insurance company about questions that you want to be cleared out before buying an annuity. The quality of service you can expect from the company and the agent should also be important to you when you buy an annuity.

When you receive your contract, read it carefully and understand everything. It may offer a "free look" period for you to decide if you want to keep the contract. If you have a specific complaint or can't get the answers you need from your agent or company, contact your state insurance department.




Annuity Interest Rates


Typically, annuities of different durations or maturities offer different interest rates. When an insurance company sets the interest rate on an immediate annuity, it first determines the projected duration of the annuity's income stream. Let's say, a 90-year old purchase a life annuity and a 65-year old also purchase the same life annuity as that of the 90-yr old, then the expected number of payments the insurance company should make will be fewer for the 90-year old than the 65-year old. This difference is attributable to their varying life expectancies.

Current interest rate is the interest rate that an annuity is paying given by the insurance company during the issue and is guaranteed for specific length of time . It is the base rate's sum, if any, and the bonus rate, if any.


The minimum interest rate that can be credited to the policy equity index annuity in a year or over the term of the contract is the "Floor." Interest that is credited to your policy is added to your principal and the interest credited in prior policy years. However, some companies don't compound what an investor has gained be credited to equity index policies from prior years, which reduces the overall rate of return earned by your investment dramatically. The investor should know about the terms and conditions of the annuity he/she is going to buy. The most important thing to know is the interest rate the annuity is paying because the reason why you are investing is because you want to gain. Remember that annuities commonly follow the direction of longer term interest rates. Anyone in the market who bought an annuity during the past year who has been waiting for interest rates to move up, has so long been disappointed.

Annuity interest rates are said to be closely related with treasury interest rates because the up and down in treasury interest rates tends to fluctuate Annuity interest rates as well. This is because ,typically, the insurance companies invest in interest-bearing instruments. This means that if the interest rates on the 10-year treasury note is increasing, then the insurance company can rise the rate it pays on a 10-year annuity and if the rates are declining, then the insurance company can decrease the rates whatever it is paying.

If you have a problem...

If you have a problem with your equity-indexed annuity, you should contact your state insurance commissioner. You can send them your complaint using their online complaint form at www.sec.gov/complaint.shtml.


You can also reach the agency by regular mail at:

Securities and Exchange Commission
Office of Investor Education and Assistance
100 F Street, N.E.
Washington, D.C. 20549-0213