To be or not to be, that is thequestion. Although the original quotation from Hamlet was not about the author himself, instead it was awritten story by an author. Scholars ask the question on the same premise. Was the man WilliamShakespeare truly the author of all theseastonishing, spellbound works, such as the infamous Hamlet andRomeo and Juliet, or was the name simply apseudonym for Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford, oranother. Because of Shakespearesprovincial background, records found, and unreliablesources, authenticity of his writings hasleft a controversy for scholars and curious members of society to debate.

Many scholars find the work probably not to havecome from a man of William Shakespeare's background. Being the son of a glove-maker, the manShakespeare is not known to have an enriched knowledge in anything in particular. Looking at thedialect from the plays, it is hard to seewhere Shakespeare could pick up that kind of slang. He uses soldierslang, which is, in the time period of hislife, something you would only learn fromexperience.

With the knowledge of Shakespeare to have neverbeen involved in any military duties, it is clearly seen a mystery. The only evidence that stands forwhere he could have learned his writingskills was at his grammar school. A low class school whereShakespeare could have learned languageand literature may be the only school he ever attended. It ispossible that a he could learn suchbrilliant dialogue and imagery, but is it likely? Could aplain society full of different classesteach a genius, or did that genius teach thesociety?

With only a will in Shakespeare's name, andevidence that he was an actor, it is too far of a stretch for him to be recognized as the world's mostfamous writer with no hard evidence thatproves him worthy to be the playwright. In his will and othersignatures found in documents, WilliamShakespeare signs his name 6 different ways. How could a man ofsuch high intelligence spell his own namewrong? This is a question that all who are involved in this controversy ask. It may mean that he, infact, is a man of the common, but yet his name is used as a pseudonym for a very charitable man. Thewill of the man William Shakespeareconsists of every small detail he owned, yet there is no mention ofany plays, poems, and so on. Even a man ofa very charitable cause would most likely leave his best gift to the world in his will, the privateheirloom for his family. This is thought of as a very strange twist to this already windy path.Society may just unconsciously think that Shakespeare was the playwright as we all may think he maybe, but where is thereproof?

With the only evidence looked at, the mystery ofprobably the greatest writer of all time remains a mystery because of the people who are left aswitnesses. People such as Al Rowse areonly believers from faith, or other, and cannot account for such anexpense. The scholars are left withsomething that they have no control over: the past. They aredigging and digging for long lost evidenceor just something that could answer this curious and pain-staking mystery. Was a man such as Edward deVere, 17th Earl of Oxford really that humble as to give a man, of his knowledge, nonexistent, thepower that he should of got for the restof all time? It is hard to believe, but then again it is a prettyclose match.

This is going to be left as is unless a newtechnology comes in to save the day. Is the faith in our hearts enough to keep the rhythm of the iambicpentameter belonging to the man, WilliamShakespeare?

To Be or Not toBe is a 1942 comedy film directed by Ernst Lubitsch, about atroupe of actors in Nazi-occupied Warsaw who use their abilities atdisguise and acting to fool the occupying troops. It was adapted byLubitsch (uncredited) and Edwin Justus Mayer from the story byMelchior Lengyel. The film stars Carole Lombard, Jack Benny, RobertStack, Felix Bressart, Lionel Atwill, Stanley Ridges and SigRuman.

The title is a reference to the famous "To be, ornot to be" soliloquy in WilliamShakespeare's Hamlet . To Be or Not to Be was releasedtwo months after actress Carole Lombard was killed in an airplanecrash.

The movie chronicles the adventures of a Polishtheater company before and during Nazi occupation, especially thoseof the resident ham, Josef Tura and his wife, Maria. The film openswith the seemingly impossible appearance of Adolf Hitler in Warsaw(this is before the 1939 invasion). We discover that this is alocal actor, Bronski, who is playing Hitler in a planned new worksatirizing the Nazis (the play'shighly realistic sets and costumes will be crucial later on). AfterBronski halted rehearsals by improvising, "Heil myself!", hisresemblance to Hitler was called into question, so he took to thestreets to prove himself. His effort fails when a young girl asksfor the autograph of "Mr. Bronski".

The action then shifts to later that night. Whilerehearsing the new play, the theater company has also beenperforming Shakespeare's Hamlet , with Maria as Ophelia andTura in the title role. Bronski commiserates with his friend andcolleague, Greenberg, about always being the ones to "carry aspear," instead of having starring roles. Greenberg reveals it hasalways been his dream to perform Shylock, especially the famous"Hath not a Jew eyes?..." speech.

Meanwhile, Maria is inspecting a bouquet of flowersshe has received, the third bunch in as many days. These turn outto come from a handsome young pilot named Lieutenant StanislavSobinski. Sobinski sends a note asking for permission to finallymeet Maria, and she agrees, telling him to come to her dressingroom when her husband begins his "To be or not to be..." speech, sothey can be sure of privacy. As a result, the young man walks out(very obviously) just as Tura begins his monologue -- causing thehighly-strung actor great distress. Maria is attracted to Sobinskiwhen they meet, and the two arrange to meet again.

A few days later, at anotherperformance of Hamlet , Sobinski again walks out duringTura's speech (this has clearly become his and Maria's "thing").Sobinski by now assumes that Maria will leave her husband, give upacting, and come live with him on a farm. Before Maria can finishputting him right, her maid rushes in, saying Germany has declaredwar on Poland. Sobinski leaves to join the fight and the actorstake shelter under the theater as bombs begin to fall.

A montage and voice-over show us Hitler conqueringPoland, and tell us that the Polish division of England's Royal AirForce is fighting to free its mother country. We cut to this verydivision, where Lt. Sobinski and other young pilots are singing arousing song with an apparent Polish resistance leader named Prof.Siletsky. Siletsky intimates that he will be returning to Warsawsoon, and joyous at the chance to contact their families, thepilots write down addresses for the professor to visit. Sobinskiasks Siletsky to give Maria the message "To be or not to be", buthis suspicions are aroused when Siletsky, who claims to have livedin Warsaw, does not know who the famous Maria Tura is.

Sobinski tells his superiors, who send him to Warsawto warn the resistance about Siletsky. Sobinski is unable tocontact them but does manage to reach Maria, who passes the messageon in his stead. Immediately after, she is stopped by two Nazisoldiers, who have been ordered by Siltesky to bring her to hishotel. Siletsky delivers Sobinski's message and invites Maria todinner, hoping to recruit her as a spy for the Nazis. She pretendsto be interested and goes home "to change her clothes." Just beforeshe arrives at her apartment, Tura returns and Maria, Tura andStanislav end up in a three-way conversation in which Maria andStanislav try to figure out what to do (kill Siletsky, theyconclude), and Tura tries to figure out what on Earth is going on.In the end, Tura proclaims that he will kill Siletsky.

Later that evening, Mrs. Tura returns to theprofessor's room and pretends to be attracted to him. Just as theykiss, there is a knock at the door. It is a Nazi officer (whom werecognize as one of the members of the acting company). He informsthe professor that he is wanted at Gestapo headquarters, butactually escorts him to the theater, which has been hastilydisguised with props and costumes from the play.

Tura pretends to be Col. Ehrhardt of the Gestapo,but Siletsky sees through the ruse. He tries to escape, but is shotand killed by Sobinski on the stage of the theater. Tura returns tothe hotel disguised as Siletsky in a fake beard and glasses, todestroy the information about the Polish resistance that Siletskyhas in his trunk. Unfortunately, he's met at the hotel by the realCol. Ehrhardt's adjutant, Capt. Schultz, and taken to meet Ehrhardthimself. Luckily, Tura manages to pass himself off as Siletsky andlearns during their meeting that Hitler himself will visit Polandthe next day.

The next day, the real Siletsky's body is discoveredin the theater. Ehrhardt sends for Maria to tell her, but she isunable to warn Tura in time, and he arranges another meeting withEhrhardt, again posing as Siletsky. When Tura arrives, Ehrhardtsends him into a room with Siletsky's dead body in it, hoping tofrighten him into a confession. Ad libbing like a pro, however,Tura shaves off Siletsky's beard and then attaches a spare fakebeard that he was carrying in his pocket. He then calls Ehrhardtinto the room and manipulates him into pulling Siletsky's now-fakebeard off. This seems to prove that the real Siletsky was actuallythe imposter, but just as Tura is about to make his escape, theother actors (sent by Maria and again in Nazi costume) storm intoEhrhardt's office, yank off Tura's false beard and pretend to draghim away to prison. This does get Tura out of Gestapo headquarters,but now he cannot leave the country on the plane Ehrhardt hadarranged for him, and it's only a matter of time before the actors'ruse is discovered.

Now the actors make their boldest gambit of all. TheNazis put on a show at the theater to welcome Hitler (the soldiersperform), and Sobinski and the actors sneak in, again dressed asNazis. Prominent among them is Bronski, initially without hisHitler mustache from the play. The actors hide in the powder roomsuntil Hitler arrives and takes his seat, and then, as the Nazis aresinging the German national anthem inside, Greenberg suddenlyappears from the ladies' room and charges toward Hitler's box. Thisdistracts the Fuhrer's guards long enough for Bronski, now wearinga Hitler mustache, to emerge unnoticed from the men's room andpretend to have come out of Hitler's box surrounded by his"entourage."

Playing the head of Hitler's men, Tura demands toknow what Greenberg wants from the Fuhrer, and Greenberg finallygets his chance to deliver Shylock's famous speech, infusing itwith all his love for Poland and his hatred of the Nazis that havesubjugated it. He ends with a ringing "if you wrong us, shall wenot revenge?!" and Tura orders his "officers" to take Greenbergaway. He also recommends that Bronski/Hitler leave Polandimmediately, and all the actors march out, get in Hitler's car anddrive away.

Meanwhile, back at her apartment, Maria is waitingfor the actors to pick her up on their way to the airport. They allintend to leave on Hitler's plane, but Col. Ehrhardt shows up andtries to seduce her (offering extra butter rations and a beautifulbracelet he confiscated just that day). Ehrhardt is utterlyfloored, however, when the door opens and Bronski walks indisguised as Hitler. He's come up in place of Tura, who's lost hisfake mustache and can't leave the car (the real Nazis driving itwould realize he's a fake). Equally shocked, Bronski turns andwalks out in silence, but Ehrhardt immediately thinks that Maria ishaving an affair with Hitler and that he has just been caughttrying to steal the Fuhrer's girl. It's the perfect opportunity forMaria, who dashes after Bronski calling, "Mein Fuhrer, MeinFuhrer!" and escapes with the other actors.

All the actors take off in the plane. They easilydispose of the real Nazi pilots -- Bronski, still dressed asHitler, simply orders them to jump out of the plane (at about10,000 feet and without parachutes); the mindlessly obedientpilots instantly leap to their deaths. Sobinski flies the plane toScotland, where Bronski causes a little surprise when he parachutesinto a farmer's bale of hay in his Hitler costume and makeup. Theactors are soon revealed as heroes. Asked what reward he'd like forhis service to the Allies, Tura hems and haws in a show of falsemodesty, but Maria quickly answers in his stead, "he wants to playHamlet."

In the movie's final scene, Tura is once again onstage as Hamlet and reaches the moment of "To be or not to be." Heeyeballs Sobinski in the audience as he begins the speech, but both of them are struck dumb when a new young man gets upand heads backstage.
