Afghanistan is alandlocked country which can be found in the southwest-centralregion of Asia. Since ancient times, this part of Asia has beencrossed by invaders from Persia, Macedonia, the Arab region, Turkeyand Mongolia. The tribes of Afghanistan were united in the 18thcentury under one leader. It became a fully independent state inthe year 1919. The capital of Afghanistan is Kabul. There is anestimated 31,900,000 population in the country.
HISTORY
Afghanistan is located astride the landroutes between the subcontinent of India, Iran, and the centralregion of Asia. Because of its prime location, Afghanistan hasenticed conquerors throughout history. Afghanistan has highmountains which hindered unity among tribes. However, it also hasan important role in helping the hill tribes to preserve theirindependence. There is a high possibility that there werewell-developed civilizations in Afghanistan even in prehistorictimes. However, there are no clear evidence given by availablearchaeological records. The cultures had flourished in the northand east parts of the territory before Darius I (c.500 B.C.), thePersian king conquered these areas. At a latter date, Alexander theGreat conquered (329327 B.C.) Afghanistan on his way toIndia.

Upon the death of Alexander (323 B.C.) theAfghan region at became part of the Seleucid empire for some time.Bactria, the northern part became independent, and the south wasconquered by the dynasty of Maurya. Bactria was able to expandsouthward but fell to the rebellious tribes and Parthians (alsoknown as the Saka). The Buddhist religion was introduced from bythe Y echi. The Kushan dynasty was founded during early 2d cent. B.C.. The capital of the dynasty was Peshawar. In 3d cent. A.D., the Kushans declinedand were supplanted by the Sassanids, the Ephthalites, andthe Turkish Tu-Kuie.

In the 7th cent, theconquest of Afghanistan, by the Muslims, began. There were severalshort-lived Muslim dynasties that were founded. Mahmud of Ghaznawas characterized as the greatest among the rulers of Afghanistan.He was able to conquer the lands from Khorasan in Iran to thePunjab in India early in the 11th cent. Jenghiz Khan (c.1220) andTimur (late 14th cent.) were the known subsequent conquerors of thearea. Babur, who was a descendant of Timur, stayed in Kabul andmade it the base for his conquest of India. Kabul was also made forthe establishment of the Mughal empire in the 16th cent. In the18th cent. the Persian Nadir Shah extended his term as a ruler ofthe Hindu Kush. After his death in 1747, his lieutenant, AhmadShah, who has served as an Afghan tribal leader, was able toestablish a united state which covers most of present-dayAfghanistan. The dynasty of Ahmad Shah was called the Durrani. Thisname gave the Afghans the name Durrani which they themselvesfrequently use.

The Afghan Wars and Independence

The reign of the Durrani dynasty ended in theyear 1818. After the dynasty, no predominant ruler emerged untilDost Muhammad has become the emir in the year 1826. During the ruleof the emir, the status of Afghanistan became an problem to theinternational community. The leaders of both Britain and Russiaaimed to work for influence in central Asia. Britain and Russiaacted to control access to the northern approaches to India. TheBritish leaders have tried to replace Dost Muhammad with anotheremir in order to subordinate the Afghan region. This policylaunched by Britain caused the first Afghan War between the Afghansand the British. Dost Muhammad was deposed at first. After anAfghan revolt which happened in Kabul, Dost Muhammad was restored.In the year 1857, Dost Muhammad signed a pact of alliance with theBritish. He died in the year 1863 and was succeeded by his thirdson, Sher Ali. The succession occurred not without familialfighting.

The Russians were able to acquire territorybordering on the Amu Darya. Sher Ali and the British had somemisunderstandings on the agreement and the second Afghan War beganin the year 1878. Sher Ali died in 1879. His successor was YakubKhan who ceded the Khyber Pass and other areas of Afghanistan tothe British. After a British envoy was murdered, the Britishoccupied Kabul. Abd ar-Rahman Khan was afterwards recognized asemir in the year 1880. Afghanistan's borders were more preciselydefined in the following years. Russia, British India and Persiahad some border agreements. These are known as the Durand Agreementin 1893. The agreement between Britain and Russia in 1907 grantedthe independence of Afghanistan from the British influence inforeign affairs. Abd ar-Rahman Khan died in 1901. He was succeededby his son Habibullah. Afghanistan remained neutral in World War Iin spite of pressure from its British ally. Habibullah wasassassinated in 1919. His successor was Amanullah. Amanullahattempted to free himself of British influence. He tried to invadeIndia 1919. The Treaty of Rawalpindi ended the third Afghan War.This marked the authority and power of Afghanistan to gain fullcontrol over its foreign relat ions. GOVERNMENT
The government of Afghanistan is currentlyunder the constitution of 2004. The president serves as bothh ead of state and of government. Thepresident is popularly elected for a term of five years and mayserve a second term. The president has the power and authority toappoint a cabinet. However, the members of the cabinet must beapproved by the legislative branch of the government. Thelegislature of Afghanistan is called the National Assembly. It isbicameral in nature. The lower house is called the House of thePeople (Wolesi Jirga). The lower house consists of no more than 249members. The members of the lower house are directly elected to aterm of five years. The upper house is called the House of Elders(Meshrano Jirga). The upper house has 102 members. A third of theupper house members are elected by provincial councils and haveterms of four years. Another third of the upper house is elected bydistrict councils and has terms of three years. The rest of themembers of the upper house should have half of it women. Thispercentage of the upper house is appointed by the president andallowed to stay in office for five years. Every law passed by theAssembly should be in accordance to the Islam religion. Foradministrative matters, the country is divided to 34provinces.


The constitution of Afghanistan provides for a strongpresidential system. The president has two vice-presidents. One ofthe vice-presidents is more important than the other.

The President should be a Muslim, an Afghancitizen who is born of Afghan parents, and must not have violatedany criminal law or convicted of crimes against humanity anddeprivation of civil rights of other people. The president alsoserves as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces.

The responsibilities of the presidentinclude: The determination of policies upon theapproval of the National Assembly The appointment of the nation's ministers,the attorney general, the central bank director, and the SupremeCourt justices upon the approval of the main legislative bodycalled the Wolesi Jirga . The appointment of the nation's first andsecond vice presidents

The top court of the Afghan Republic is calledthe Stera Mahkama (Supreme Court). The members of the supreme courtmembers are appointed by the president. These members are entitledto a term of ten years. There are also High Courts, Appeals Courts,and local and district courts. Interested and eligible judges canhave training and be more focused in either Islamic jurisprudenceor secular law.

Courts are allowed to use Hanafi jurisprudenceif the specific situations on a case lacks applicable provisionsfrom the Supreme Court.



ECONOMY
The economy of Afghanistan is recoveringfrom the long decades of conflict. The economy of the county hasalleviated and improved significantly ever since the Taliban regimegot dissolved and fell in 2001 largely because of the help andinfusion of international assistance. There has been a significantrecovery of the agricultural sector and the service growth sectorwhich can be attributed to the growing political stability in theregion. Real growth in GDP has exceeded 7% in the year 2007.Despite the economic progress in the past few years, Afghanistanremains to be extremely poor economically, landlocked, and highlydependent on the generosity of other countries for foreign aid.Another economic booster for Afghanistan is agriculture.Afghanistan also has trade and negotiations with neighboringcountries. Much of the population of Afghanistan continues tosuffer from shortages in housing and building their homes, sourcefor clean water for drinking and cleaning, electricity, medicalcare, employment, and jobs. The prevalence of crimes, insecurity,and the inability of the Afghan government to extend the rule oflaw to all parts of the country pose challenges to the future ofeconomic growth. It will probably take one more decade andcontinuing donor aid from other countries and focus tosignificantly raise living standards in Afghanistan and the Afghanpeople, from its current level which is actually among the lowestin the world. International pledges given by more than 60 nations,international organizations and international financialinstitutions at the Berlin Donors Conference for the reconstructionof Afghanistan in March 2004 have reached $8.9 billion for 2004-09.While the international community continues to be committed tohelping Afghanistan develop, pledging over $24 billion at threedonors' conferences since the year 2002, Kabul is expected to need,in order to overcome a number of challenges to the nation.Expanding the cultivation of poppy and a growing opium tradegenerate roughly $4 billion in illicit economic activity. Thisphenomenon looms as one of Kabul's most serious policy concerns.Other long-term challenges for the Afghan state include: budgetsustainability, job creation, corruption, government capacity, andrebuilding war torn infrastructure.


