Music historians traditionally divide the development of Western music into several major periods and movements.

The Medieval era was the first time that composers in significant numbers began to write down music to preserve it and communicate it to others. The earliest examples of this written music come from the medieval Catholic Church, in the form of Gregorian chant. By the 1400s, composers began to write polyphony. Polyphonic writing became more sophisticated as composers changed styles from the Ars Antiqua to the Ars Nova. In the 1100s and 1200s, troubadours composed the first secular music unaffiliated with the church.

Gregorian chant: A single-line melody sung in unison by one or more people. Chant used religious text for its words and was written by monks in the Catholic Church.

Polyphony: Music that combines two or more lines, which are more or less independent of each other, at the same time.

Ars Antiqua: The earliest movement of written polyphony. It originated in the cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris in the 1200s.

Ars Nova: A French movement of the 1300s that greatly refined notation and polyphonic writing from the era of Ars Antiqua.

Troubadours: Wandering musicians in Medieval France who sang songs of courtly love. The troubadours made important musical innovations and were the first main source of secular music.

Defining the beginning of the era is difficult, given the lack of abrupt shifts in musical thinking during the 15th century. The process by which music acquired "Renaissance" characteristics was a gradual one, and musicologists have placed its beginnings from as early as 1300 to as late as the 1470s. In addition, the Italian humanist movement, rediscovering and reinterpreting the aesthetics of ancient Greece and Rome, influenced the development of musical style during the period.

The Renaissance heralded a breakthrough of new ideas and techniques to Western music and brought innovations at a faster rate than ever before. The printing press enabled easier duplication and distribution of music and musical treatises, and the study of music became more common, not only for members of the church. Composers began to view music more as an expressive art than as a science. They further developed and codified the conventions of musical notation, began to write four-part polyphony as standard practice, and began to use imitation regularly. By the end of the Renaissance, composers had mastered the art of counterpoint. Instrumental music rose in prominence relative to vocal music, and the complete Mass was commonly set to music.

Four-part writing: A common configuration of four parts, often abbreviated SATB (short for soprano, alto, tenor, and bass, the four standard voice registers).

Imitation: A device used in polyphony in which one part follows another by repeating a similar or same passage played first by the other part.

Counterpoint: A device in which two (or more) melodic lines run simultaneously but neither becomes dominant over the other, so both can be heard independently.

Instruments of the Renaissance

Many instruments originated during the Renaissance; others were variations of, or improvements upon, instruments that had existed previously. Some have survived to the present day; others have disappeared, only to be recreated in order to perform music of the period on authentic instruments. As in the modern day, instruments may be classified as brass, strings, percussion, and woodwind.

Brass Brass instruments in the Renaissance were traditionally played by professionals. Some of the more common brass instruments that were played: Slide trumpet: Similar to the trombone of today except that instead of a section of the body sliding, only a small part of the body near the mouthpiece and the mouthpiece itself is stationary.
Cornett: Made of wood and was played like the recorder but blown like a trumpet.
Trumpet: Early trumpets had no valves, and were limited to the tones present in the overtone series .
Sackbut(sometimes sackbutt or sagbutt): A different name for the trombone, which replaced the slide trumpet by the end of the fifteenth century.


Strings As a family strings were used in many circumstances, both sacred and secular. A few members of this family include:
Viol: This instrument,developed in the 1400s, commonly has six strings. It was usually played with a bow. This is the predecessor of the modern-day violin, viola, and violoncello (cello). Lyre: Its construction is similar to a small harp, although instead of being plucked, it is strummed with a plectrum. Its strings varied in quantity from four, seven, and ten, depending on the era.
Irish Harp : Also called the Cl rsach in Scottish Gaelic, or the Cl irseach in Irish, during the Middle Ages it was the most popular instrument of Ireland and Scotland.
Hurdy gurdy: (Also known as the wheel fiddle), in which the strings are sounded by a wheel which the strings pass over. Its functionality can be compared to that of a mechanical violin, in that its bow (wheel) is turned by a crank.


Percussion Some Renaissance percussion instruments include the triangle, the Jew's harp, the tambourine, the bells, the rumble-pot, and various kinds of drums. Tambourine: In the early ages the tambourine was originally a frame drum without the jingles attached to the side. This instrument soon evolved and took on the name of the timbrel during the medieval crusades, at which time it acquired the jingles. The tambourine was often found with a single skin, as it made it easy for a dancer to play. The skin that surrounds frame is called the vellum, and produces the beat by striking the surface with the knuckles, fingertips, or hand. Jew's harp: An instrument often known for its historical purpose for men "serenading" their sweethearts. It even went to the extent of being repeatedly banned for its "endangerment on female virtue", it is also believed that it was banned because of its construction of silver, and due to the great demand on silver in the 19th Century Austria this was another reason for its outlawing.

Woodwinds (Aerophones) The woodwind instruments (Aerophones) use a column of air vibrating within a pipe that has little holes along it to generate vibration with the airflow through the pipe and control the length of the sound waves produced by the vibrating air. A player could create this air column by using a few different methods. The first is blowing across a mouth hole (as would be done with flutes). The second is blowing into a mouthpiece with a single reed (as would be found with the clarinet or saxophone) or a double reed (which is used with oboes and bassoons).

The woodwind instruments of the Middle Ages are not the same as modern day woodwinds. They were more eccentric and exotic. Shawm: A typical oriental shawm is keyless and is about a foot long with seven finger holes and a thumb hole. The pipes were also most commonly made of wood and many of them had carvings and decorations on them.
Reed pipe: Made from a single short length of cane with a mouthpiece, four or five finger holes, and reed fashioned from it. It is the predecessor of the saxophone and the clarinet. Hornpipe: Same as reed pipe but with a bell at the end. Bagpipe /Bladderpipe: Believe to have been invented by herdsmen who thought to use a bag made out of sheep or goat skin and would provide air pressure so that when its player takes a breath, the player only needs to squeeze the bag tucked underneath their arm to continue the tone. The mouth pipe has a simple round piece of leather hinged on to the bag end of the pipe and acts like a non-return valve.
The 1600s saw the rise of instrumental music as composers explored techniques and new instrumental forms. The sonata and concerto were born during this period, and growing virtuosity of performance emerged to accompany these forms. Keyboard music flourished, specifically for harpsichord. The Baroque era also saw the dawning of new vocal forms, including the cantata, opera, and oratorio. Music became a central part of daily life, and composers found new ways to express themselves dramatically, sometimes in extreme fashion. In addition, patrons unaffiliated with the church began to support composers in large numbers.

Although many people use the term classical music to denote a broad category of instrumental or vocal music that is different from popular music, this usage can be confusing because the term also refers more specifically to the Classical era. In the Classical era, composers reacted against what they saw as unnatural and exaggerated in the Baroque style. As they sought balance of both expression and form, formal structures grew in sophistication and became more central to composition. Music grew increasingly homophonic, and composers reserved use of counterpoint only for specific situations that demanded it. Orchestral and chamber music became more important, and the symphony and string quartet were born as music grew increasingly secular in nature. The forte piano, the precursor to the modern piano, was invented shortly before the Classical period and became very important, for it was capable of greater dynamic expression than the harpsichord. Wind instruments that had developed in the Baroque era came into more widespread use and prominence.

Homophony: A musical texture distinct from polyphony in that it sets one melody together with a subordinate melody against an accompanimental background.

Beethoven opened the door to the Romantic period by defying conventions of the Classical era and expanding possibilities in his own music. The Romantic composers were more interested in pure expressive content in their works and used larger dynamic ranges and longer melodic lines. As a result, composers individual voices became more distinct from each other, often strikingly so. Some composers relied on nonmusical subject matter to write program music in less rigid forms, like the orchestral tone poem. At the same time, nationalism became an important factor in composition, as composers began to draw on folk tunes, local dance forms, and other musical material native to their homelands. The size and scope of music also expanded: Some composers specialized in very short chamber works, while others wrote lengthy pieces for massive ensembles.

Program music: Music written to follow a plot or describe a nonmusical idea. Berliozs Symphonie Fantastique, for instance, follows the course of a troubled artists life with musical illustrations of people and events.

Nationalism: A turn toward native forms and ideas. Nationalist composers used folk melodies from their native lands and often wrote patriotic music.

At the end of the Romantic period, composers pushed the boundaries of musical development so far that they eventually broke and a common harmonic language no longer existed. Harmonies became more dissonant as chromaticism was used to a greater degree. Impressionist composers prioritized color and texture. Others invented their own rules of counterpoint and harmony, such as serialism. Others, the neoclassicists, turned to music from the past for inspiration. Many composers broke away from traditional major and minor scales and used other scales, such as the whole-tone scale and octatonic scale.

Chromaticism: Use of harmonies that do not exist naturally in a key. Chromatic music sounds denser and more dissonant and often modulates to a number of keys within a single piece.

Impressionism: In music (as opposed to the visual arts), a movement founded by Debussy, who made color and texture central elements in his music

Neoclassicism: A movement, pioneered by Stravinsky in the 1920s, in which composers brought a modern perspective to older music. Frequently, composers writing in this style used traditional forms and musical language and then altered it to create a new sound. Neoromanticism is another movement that came into being a short time later.

Serialism: A method of composing, invented by Sch nberg, in which all twelve notes of the chromatic scale are used in an ordered succession. Serialism can effectively destroy the feeling of key and tonality. It is also called twelve-tone, dodecaphonic, or atonal music.

As the 20th century progressed, composers took more liberty with form and technique and pushed the frontier of music further. Experimentalists tried extended techniques to create new types of sound. The first electronic music opened a new range of possibilities. Composers introduced graphic notation to achieve new effects like indeterminacy. Although some critics have felt that these new methods have distanced composers from their audiences, there are still many active contemporary composers all over the world contributing to a living music history.

Experimentalism: A movement that sought to explore the very idea of music by seeking new ways to create sounds outside of traditional instrumental playing. Experimental composers tried to create new definitions of music and redefine the audiences listening experience.

Extended techniques: Unconventional playing techniques (e.g., knocking the back of a cello, putting an oboe reed in a trombone mouthpiece) that experimental composers pioneered in their attempts to create new sounds.

Electronic music: Music created with electronic devices instead of acoustic instruments. The first electronic instrument was the Theremin, a box that emitted radio waves and produced a unique sound similar to a violin and human voice combined. In the 1950s, composers experimented with audiotape pieces called musique concrete, which often incorporated sounds from nature with human sounds. Today, nearly any sound imaginable can be simulated electronically. Some composers work in electroacoustic media (combinations of electronic devices and live performers on instruments), while others work in exclusively electronic means.

Graphic notation: A new approach to music notation that emerged in the middle of the 20th century. Graphic notation incorporates images, charts, and shapes not found in traditional music notation to communicate the composers wishes.

Indeterminacy: A technique in which the composer leaves certain choices to the performer, including what notes, rhythms, or speed to play. Indeterminacy introduces a level of randomness and improvisation in performance.


Rock and roll (also spelled rock 'n' roll, especially in its first decade), also called rock, is a form of popular music, usually featuring vocals (often with vocal harmony), electric guitars and a strong back beat; other instruments, such as the saxophone, are common in some styles. As a cultural phenomenon, rock's social impact on the world is likely unparalleled by any other kind of music. It has been credited with ending wars and spreading peace and tolerance, as well as corrupting the innocent and spreading moral rot. Rock, born in the United States, has become popular across the globe, and has evolved into a multitude of highly-varying styles.

Rock and roll emerged as a defined musical style in America in the 1950s, though elements of rock and roll can be heard in rhythm and blues records as far back as the 1920s. Early rock and roll combined elements of blues, boogie woogie , jazz and rhythm and blues, and is also influenced by traditional Appalachian folk music, gospel and country and western. Going back even further, rock and roll can trace a foundational lineage to the old Five Points district of mid-19th century New York City, the scene of the first fusion of heavily rhythmic African shuffles and sand dances with melody driven European genres, particularly the Irish jig.

Rocking was a term first used by gospel singers in the American South to mean something akin to spiritual rapture. By the 1940s, however, the term was used as a double entendre, ostensibly referring to dancing, but with the hidden subtextual meaning of sex; an example of this is Roy Brown 's "Good Rocking Tonight". This type of song was usually relegated to "race music" (the music industry code name for rhythm and blues) outlets and was rarely heard by mainstream white audiences. In 1951, Cleveland, Ohio disc jockey Alan Freed would begin playing this type of music for his white audience, and it is Freed who is credited with coining the phrase "rock and roll" to describe the rollicking R&B music that he brought to the airwaves.

There is much debate as to what should be considered the first rock and roll record. Candidates include the 1951 "Rocket 88" by Jackie Brenston & His Delta Cats, or later and more widely-known hits like Chuck Berry's "Maybellene" "Johnny B. Goode" or Bo Diddley's "Bo Diddley" or Bill Haley & His Comets' "Rock Around the Clock". Some historians go further back, pointing to musicians like Fats Domino, who were recording in the 40s in styles largely indistinguishable from rock and roll; these include Louis Jordan's "Is You Is or Is You Ain't My Baby?", Jack Guthrie's "The Oakie Bookie" (1947) and Benny Carter and Paul Vandervoort II 's "Rock Me to Sleep" (1950). Two years later in 1954, Elvis Presley began recording with Sam Phillips, starting with the hit "That's All Right, Mama". Elvis played a rock and country & western fusion called rockabilly, which was characterized by hiccupping vocals, slapping bass and a spastic guitar style. He became possibly the first celebrity musician and teen idol to perform in the genre.

It was the following year's "Rock Around the Clock" by Bill Haley & His Comets that really set the rock boom in motion, though. The song was one of the biggest hits in history, and frenzied teens flocked to see Haley and the Comets perform it, even causing riots in some places; "Rock Around the Clock" was a breakthrough for both the group and for all of rock and roll music. If everything that came before laid the groundwork, "Clock" certainly set the mold for everything else that came after. With its combined rockabilly and R & B influences, "Clock" topped the U.S. charts for several weeks, and became wildly popular in places like Australia and Germany. The single, released by independent label Festival Records in Australia, was the biggest-selling recording in the country at the time.



Within the timeline of radio, several people were involved in the invention of radio and there were many key inventions in what became the modern systems of wireless.Radio development began as "wireless telegraphy". Closely related, radio was developed along with two other key inventions, the telegraph and the telephone.During the early development of wireless technology and long after its wide use, disputes persisted as to who could claim credit for the invention of radio. The matter was important for economic, political and nationalistic reasons.
Summary of "inventors of radio" Name Pro Con Earliest transmission Bose Researched coherers

Transmitted microwaves over distance of 75 feet in 1895.

Had transmitted microwaves nearly a mile by 1896. Did not pursue commercialization. 1895 Deforest Developed the triode amplifier and the Audion tube. Late upon beginning research into space telegraphy . 1896 Henry Henry detected electromagnetic effects at a distance of two hundred feet. He was focused on wired telegraphy and researched self-inductance. 1829 Hertz By 1888, Hertz had studied and understood the work of Maxwell and, by design, produced the first clear and undisputed experimental evidence for the transmission and reception of radio waves. Hertz took this work no further, did not exploit it commercially, and famously did not consider it useful. 1888 Hughes In 1879, Hughes began research into radio waves. He noticed electrical interference in an induction balance he was working with. The observed effect was due to radio waves and he discovered and improved the coherer. Hughes was not trying to design equipment for wireless communication. His discovery was taken no further. 1879 Lodge On 14 August 1894 Lodge sent a radio message in Morse code. Did not pursue further. 1894 Loomis In 1872, received a patent for a "wireless telegraph". Patent utilizes atmospheric electricity to eliminate the overhead wire used by the existing telegraph systems. His patent U.S. Patent 129,971 was for the purpose of receiving and imparting atmospheric electricity. None (n/a) Marconi In summer 1895, Marconi sent signals 1.5 km.

In 1896, applied for British patent protection for a radio system. In 1900, he was granted British patent No. 12,039 .

Transmission over 6 km in March and May 1897.

Transatlantic transmission on 12 December 1901.

Tansmission over 3,378 km in February 1902.

Transatlantic message on 17 December 1902.

In 1897 Marconi founded " Wireless Telegraph and Signal Company " and exploited the "Marconi System" of radio commercially.

He shared the 1909 Nobel Prize in Physics with Karl Ferdinand Braun, "in recognition of their contributions to the development of wireless telegraphy." His 1901 transatlantic transmission is disputed.

Many of Marconi's system components were developed by others. Oliver Lodge claimed British patent of 1900 to contain his own ideas which he failed to patent. 1895 Maxwell By 1864 Maxwell had become the first person to demonstrate theoretically the existence of radio (electromagnetic) waves, which are used by all radio equipment. Maxwell did not generate or receive radio waves. None (n/a) Popov Confirmed laboratory demonstration of radio on 17 May 1895. In March 1896 publicly demonstrated the sending of a signal 550 m between two campus buildings. By 1900 he had reliable communications over 25 miles. Was not the first to send signals significant distances. 1895 Tesla

Tesla developed means to reliably produce radio frequency currents.

In 1891 and afterwards, lectured about high-frequency devices and demonstrated devices using power without the use of wires.

Referring to a demonstration of his wireless equipment in 1893 the IEE said "the apparatus that he employed contained all the elements of spark and continuous wave that were incorporated into radio transmitters before the advent of the vacuum tube".

By 1895, stated that he had the ability to transmit signals under 50 miles.

In 1897, Tesla applied for protection for the radio arts. In 1900 Tesla was granted U.S. Patent 645,576 and U.S. Patent 649,621 .

In 1898, demonstrated a radio controlled boat in Madison Square Garden that allowed secure communication between transmitter and receiver.

After 1915, assisted the Telefunken engineers in constructing the Telefunken Wireless Station (the "Arco-Slaby system") in Sayville, Long Island.

No independently confirmed radio transmissions before 1898.

Primarily because of financial difficulties, Tesla never completed his "worldwide wireless system". The Wardenclyffe Tower transceiver that he began at Shoreham on Long Island, New York was eventually torn down. 1891 Ward Ward was the first person to be granted a US patent relating to wireless telegraphy. His patent U.S. Patent 126,356 was for the purpose of receiving and imparting natural electricity . None (n/a)