Young has directed several films under his pseudonym Bernard Shakey. These include Journey Through the Past in 1973, Rust Never Sleeps in 1979, Human Highway in 1982, Greendale in 2003 and CSNY D j Vu in 2008.

He is also a strong advocate for environmental issues In 1985 he founded the benefit concert Farm Aid, and in 1986 helped found The Bridge School and its annual supporting Bridge School Benefit concerts with his wife Pegi. This is an issue close to his heart as both of his sons have cerebral palsy and both he and his daughter have epilepsy.

Young sings as often about America as he does about his native country Canada. He remains a Canadian citizen and has never wanted to give up his Canadian citizenship.



His parents, sportswriter and novelist Scott Young and Rassy Ragland. Neil grew up in the town of Omemee, in Ontario. He moved back to Manitoba with his mother when you was 12 after his parents divorce. In Manitoba he attended the Earl Grey Junior High School where he met Ken Koblun (who would later join him in The Squires) and it was here that he formed theJades, his first band.

Neil then went on to attend Kelvin High School in Winnipeg, while here he played in several rock bands.It was here that he formed a band called the Squires/ Their song The Sultans was popular locally.Neil didn't finish high school but he continued to play.The band recorded demos produced Ray Dee, a local producer whom Neil nicknamed the original Briggs.

Neil left the Spires and took to playing theWinnipeg folk clubs. It was on the folk circuit where he met Joni Mitchell and during this time he wrote a lot of folk songs that are popular to this day.

In 1965 Neil went on a tour of Canada. In 1966 he joined up with the band the Mynah Birds and had a record deal with the Motown label. However during the recording of the album the lead singer was arrested for going AWOL from the army, and the band fell apart., Neil then moved on to LA where he formed Buffalo Springfield.



These different music styles have included jazz, rockabilly, swing, blues, and electronic music, though most of his music falls into either the acoustic folk rock style we hear on Heart of Gold", "Harvest Moon" and "Old Man" or the hard rock style we hear on "Cinnamon Girl", "Rockin' in the Free World" and "Hey Hey, My My (Into the Black)". Young often incorporates modern music styles into his playing such as industrial, alternative country and grunge. His influence on the grunge movement has led him to have the nickname 'the godfather of grunge'.



The band did well, but due to problems with the management one of the band members being deported, the band could not work together well any more and they broke up i n May 1968 Neil then went on to sign a solo deal with Reprise Records. His first solo record, Neil Young was released in November 1968.

On the next album he recruited three musicians to play with him and they were given the name Crazy Horse. The ensuing album Everybody Knows This Is Nowhere was released in May 1969, credited to Neil Young with Crazy Horse. This album was recorded in just two weeks Not long after the release of this album, Neil joined Crosby, Stills, & Nash. Neil refused to be a sideman and would only join the band if they were renamed Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young. The rest of the band agreed. Their first performance as a foursome was in Chicago in August 1969. They also performed at Woodstock In 1970 Neil released his third solo album - After the Gold Rush. This album proved to be Neil's commercial breakthrough and contains some of his most well known songs

It reached Number 8 in the album charts. The album featured Crazy Horse and guitarist Nils Lofgren who was just seventeen years old at the time. The album went gold from this album the single "Only Love Can Break Your Heart" was released that got to number 33 in the charts.



1971 was filled with a solo tour , hiring a several country music session musicians to whom he gave the name The Stray Gators.With The Stray Gators he recorded Harvest in 1972 The album was a huge hit and the song Heart of Gold from this album became Neil's 1972 also saw the birth of Neil's first child, a boy called Zeke.

Neil's next album was released in 1973 and was titled Time Fades Away. Neil describes this release as his least favourite album. This album was created during the aftermath of the loss of his friend and fellow band member Danny Whitten of a drugs overdose which had a profound effect on Neil.

This rough live album features wasrecorded with the Stray Gators, including Nitzsche on keyboards, Ben Keith on pedal steel guitar, Tim Drummond on bass, and John Barbata on the drums.

Later in that year Neil formed another band called the The Santa Monica Flyers. They recorded an album called Tonight's the Night .

Neil's record company delayed the release of Tonight's the Night, so in the meantime Young recorded On the Beach which was released in 1974.

In 1975 Neil released Zuma with Crazy Horse, an emotionally intense hard rock album that included the track "Cortez the Killer." Crazy Horse now included Talbot, Molina, and Frank "Poncho" Sampedro on rhythm guitar.



Neil then met up Elliot Mazer who had been the producer on the popular Harvest album. With Mazer, he released another acoustic album called Homegrown . The album was written after his relationship broke up, so it has a somewhat dark feel to it.Though the album was entirely completed, Young decided to drop the album and release Tonight's the Night instead as he felt this new album was just personal.

In 1975 Neil reformed, and 1976 he joined up with Stephen Stills on the album Long May You Run. They then went on tour as a follow up to the album release but

Neil left Stills halfway through the tour, informing him by telegram.

. also in 1976, Neil played at The Last Waltz, an important star filled concert . The concert was filmed and was due to be released as a movie by Martin Scorsese. The film release was delayed as it had to be edited because you could clearly see a lump of cocaine hanging from Neil's nose during his time on stage.

Another album, American Stars 'N Bars was released in 1977. Contributors included Linda Ronstadt, Emmylou Harris, Nicolette Larson and Crazy Horse. That same year Neil released Decade, a compilation of past songs he had chosen himself, along with some previously unreleased material. Then in 1978 can the release of Comes a Time which also featured Nicolette Larson and Crazy Horse. This album with its folk music feel was very popular.

Also in 1978 his second son, Ben, was born to his wife Pegi, with cerebral palsy.In an interview in 1992 Neil would tell The New York Times that his 1980s output had mirrored his frustration at not being able to communicate with his son. "Trans signified the end of one sound and era and the beginning of another era, where I was indecipherable and no one could understand what I was saying."



Neil's next step was to set out on a long tour, the Rust Never Sleeps tour which featured both a solo acoustic set and an electric set with Crazy Horse. There was an album released to accompant the tour, and a movie of the concerts which was directed by Neil under the name Bernard Shakey.

In 1979 Neil was voted Artist Of The Year and Male Vocalist Of The Year by Rolling Stone, they also chose Rust Never Sleeps as Album Of The Year.

In 1980 Neil recorded the incidental music to a biopic of Hunter S. Thompson called Where the Buffalo Roam. That same year he recorded an album called Hawks & Doves and in 1981 another album entitled Re-ac-tor with Crazy Horse. In 1982 came the release Trans . An unusual album that made great use of electronic effects. Next came a rockabilly album Everybody's Rockin' which was released in 1983. Fans were confused by his constant change of style and it even caused the head of his record company, David Geffen to sue him for making unrepresentative music. During this time he was also involved in co-directing and co-writing a full-length comedy film called Human Highway in which he also acted a part.

In 1985 Neil was back with Crosby, Stills and Nash performing at Live Aid in Philadelphia's John F. Kennedy Stadium. They played, "Only Love Can Break Your Heart" and " Daylight Again/Find The Cost of Freedom," the first songs they had played as a foursome in front of a paying audience since 1974.

1985 saw the release of Old Ways a country music style album Then in 19876 anding on Water and then Life with Crazy Horse in 1987 which fulfilled his obligations to Geffen and Neil signed to Warner Brothers, returning to Reprise Records.

The first album with this new signing was This Note's For You released in 1988 with a new band called The Bluenotes, which had to be renamed Ten Men Workin' after a musician Harold Melvin, who owned thname rights sued.

In 1989 he released Freedom which featured a blend of acoustic an electric rock styles. In That same year Terry Tolkin produced a tribute album The Bridge: A Tribute To Neil Young, featured fifteen cover versions.

His next album was Ragged Glory with Crazy Horse, recorded at his own ranch. Neil then went on tour with the punk band Social Distortion.

In 1992 Neil released another country album, Harvest Moon a sequel to Harvest In 1992 he worked on the soundtrack to the film Philadelphia. One of his songs from the soundtrack was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Song. Bruce Springsteen ended up winning the award for his song Streets of Philadelphia from the same film and in his acceptance speech, Springsteen said "the award really deserved to be shared by the other nominee's song." That same night, Tom Hanks accepted the Oscar for Best Actor and gave credit for his inspiration to Neil's song Philadelphia. Young performed with Pearl Jam at the MTV Music Awards This led on to a joint tour with the band. The album Mirror Ball was then released in 1995.

In 1996 Neil toured Europe and North America and released live album and a tour documentary both entitled Year of the Horse. In 2000 Young reunited with Crosby, Stills and Nash, they had a very successful tour.

In 2000 he also released another solo album called Silver and Goldwhich featured mostly acoustic tracks. Playing on this album were drummer Jim Keltner, bassist Donald "Duck" Dunn, Ben Keith on pedal steel and Dobro, and keyboardist Spooner Oldham. Also in 2000 Jimmy McDonough, a writer filed a massive law suit against Neil stating that he had refused to allow publication of a biography written by McDonough that Neil had originally authorized. The book was eventually released in 2002 to widespread praise. In November 2000, Young released Road Rock a live set featuring a duet with Chrissie Hynde on "All Along the Watchtower." In the aftermath of the September 11 terrorist attack, Neik recorded a single, "Let's Roll," in tribute to the passengers and crew of Flight 93. He performed a cover version of John Lennon's "Imagine" during a televised benefit concert for the victims of the attacks. "Let's Roll" appeared on 2002's Are You Passionate?, an album featuring Booker T. & the MG's. I n 2002 he also brought out an album of love songs dedicated to his wife.

In 2003 he released a concept album called Greendale which was recorded with some of the members of Crazy Horse. He also made a film based on the album which he again directed under his pseudonym Bernard Shakey, and there was also a stage version that toured North America, Japan, and Australia.



In 2005 he suffered a brain aneurysm but made a full recovery . In 2006 he released an album of protest songs called Living with War

Neil Young collects second-hand guitars, but generally only used a few of them. Let us look at some of the instruments he uses:

He has a 1953 Gibson Les Paul Goldtop Nicknamed " Old Black " This is the guitar he uses the most and you will hear him play it on the Rust Never Sleeps album and many of his other albums too. He got this guitar in the 1960's. In 1972 he had a mini- humbucker pickup from a Gibson Firebird guitar installed into the lead/treble position to replace the P-90 that was standard on Les Pauls at that time. This is considered to be a big factor in Neil's iconic sound. A Bigsby vibrato tailpiece was also installed on the guitar around 1969 which can be heard on Cowgirl in the Sand on Everybody Knows This Is Nowhere . The guitar came from Jim Messina. Young swapped a Gretch for it in 1969. Jim Messina still has the Gretch he swapped for it.

Neil's most used steel-string acoustic guitar is a Martin D-45. He used this to write "Old Man" as well as many other songs. This guitar also has a nickname. This one is called Hank because it used to belong to Hank Williams . Young has toured with this guitar for more than 30 years and is the main guitar used on the album, Prairie Wind .

He also has a 1927 Gibson Mastertone A six-string banjo which is tuned like a guitar. This was played by James Taylor on "Old Man" and you will hear it on many other songs too. Neil loves vintage Fender Tweed Deluxe amplifiers and so has many of them. In 1967 he bought his first vintage Deluxe in 1967 from Ralph Molina, the drummer of Crazy Horse. Since then his collection has grown in number to nearly 450 from that era. He nearly always uses the Tweed Deluxe in a unique pairing with a 1950's Magnatone 280. The external speaker jack from the Deluxe sends the signal through a volume potentiometer and directly into the input of the Magnatone. The Magnatone is famous for its pitch-bending vibrato capabilities. You can hear this as an electric piano amplifier on "See the Sky About to Rain".

Neil also has a unique accessory for his Tweed Deluxe - the Whizzer. This was made specially for him and it physically changes the settings to pre-set combinations.

Before he bought Old Black, Neil's main guitar was the Gretsch 6120. He used this during his time with Buffalo Springfield Towards the end of his time with Buffallo Springfield he bought a Gretsch White Falcon Late '50s hollow body, and in 1969 he bought a stereo version of the same guitar from Stills which he used a lot in the early 70s. You can hear this guitar on Alabama, Ohio, Southern Man, L.A. and several other songs of that era and famously used on the Harvest album. This signal from the 3 bass strings on this stereo 6137 White Falcon is separated from the signal from the three treble strings. Neil usually plays this guitar in stereo mode and sends the separate signals to two different amps: the Fender Deluxe and either a Fender Tremolux or a low-powered Tweed Fender Twin. You can hear this stereo separation best on the song Words on the Harvest album.



The relationship between Neil and Bob Dylan is worthy of a little further inspection.

Bob Dylan is thought to be the most influential and important 20th century singer-songwriter performing today, Young is definitely a contender for second place. His credibility and integrity put him amongst a select group of artists to be compared to Bob Dylan.

When author Jimmy McDonough asked Neil about Dylan's musical influence for his biography, he calls himself "a 'B student' of Bob Dylan."

Bob Dylan once gave Neil a copy of "Goodbye Babylon", a box collection of gospel and early country roots music.

Neil and Bob Dylan actually grew up quite near each other in the early 1960's, either side of the US / Canadian border, in the upper Midwest plains. Neil Young grew up in Winnipeg, Canada. Bob Dylan grew up just south of Winnipeg, in Hibbing, Minnesota.

One of the earliest meetings of Bob Dylan and Neil Young's music was at the S.N.A.C.K. Benefit Concert at Kezar Stadium, Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, CA in 1975. This was a one-day festival in aid of Bill Graham's S.N.A.C.K. (Students Need Athletics, Culture and Kicks) organization. Neil Young, performed there with the Stray Gators who performed together with Bob Dylan and his band. Another occasion at which the two met was in 1992 for Bob Dylan's 30th Anniversary tribute. Neil said from the stage: "Thanks Bob for BobFest!". This was another concert featuring full of big name stars. Neil performed Dylan's songs Just Like Tom Thumb's Blues and All Along the Watchtower. Attendees of the concert unanimously agreed that Young's version of All Along the Watchtower was truly amazing.

Neil Young, Bruce Springsteen and Bob Dylan performed together at the Roseland in New York City in 1994. They played Rainy Day Woman and Highway 61 Revisited. Neil used the mic stand as bottleneck for his guitar.

Neil has covered several Bob Dylan songsover his carer including Everything Is Broken which he performed in 1989 with Tom Petty at the Bridge School Benefit 3 and Forever Young in 1991 with Nicolette Larson a the Bridge School Benefit 5.

Bob Dylan has also covered Neil Young songs in concert. In 2002, Dylan covered Young's classic song Old Man on several of his tour shows. He played keyboard on this performances. Music journalists often write about the comparison between Bob Dylan and Neil Young.



During the Rust Never Sleeps tour in 1978, Neil wore a Jimi Hendrix button on his guitar strap as a tribute to his influence on rock music.On January 15, 1992, Neil Young inducted Jimi Hendrix into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. In his speech for Hendrix Neil says "Guitar -- you can play it or transcend it. Jimi showed me that. He was at one with his instrument. I just looked at it, heard it, and felt it and wanted to do it. Hendrix threw a Molotov cocktail onto rock & roll. " Later during the evening Neil paid tribute to Hendrix by performing his classic song Purple Haze on stage with Keith Richards .



Young was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame in 1982. He has been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice. In 1995 for his solo work, with an induction speech given by Eddie Vedder, and again in 1997 as a member of Buffalo Springfield.

After the induction ceremony in 1995, Neil Young joined Led Zeppelin on the stage for a guitar duel with Jimmy Page. They performed a version of "When The Levee's Gonna Break" that lasted ten minutes. Page and Young traded licks in what turned out to be a most amazing moment in TV rock.

Plant then seamlessly flows into the Buffalo Springfield classic "For What It's Worth". Not to be outdone, Robert Plant picks up a guitar and starts to jam with the guitar greats and looks to be having the time of his life dancing about on the stage.

At one point, after so much playing by these two guitar legends, an exhausted Jimmy Page drops his hands from his guitar as if to concede defeat by Young. At the conclusion of the song, Page and Plant hug Neil as they leave the stage.



Young has received two honorary doctorates. In 1992 he received an Honorary Doctorate of Music from Lakehead University in Thunder Bay, Ontario and in 2006 an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters from San Francisco State University.



a company that makes toy trains and railroads. Neil is also an inventor, and has been named as co-inventor of seven U.S. Patents related to model trains: Nos. 7,264,208;7,211,976; 6,765,356; 5,749,547; 5,555,815; 5,441,223; and 5,251,856.

In 1996 Mojo magazine featured Neil Young in the number 9 spot in their "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time" list. In 2000 Neil was listed at number 39 on VH1's 100 Greatest Artist of Hard Rock . In 2001, Young was awarded the Spirit of Liberty award from the civil liberties group People for the American Way. In 2004, Rolling Stone Magazine listed Neil at number 34 in their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. In 2006 Paste Magazine listed Neil at number 2 behind Bob Dylan . in their "Greatest Living Songwriters" list.



In March 1999, Neil inducted Paul McCartney into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. During Neil's induction speech he said: "The first song I learned to play was a Beatles song "Give Me Money, That's What I Want". Paul McCartney is one of the greatest songwriters ever. He'll be remembered hundreds of years from now."When Young handed Paul the Hall of Fame statue, Paul McCartney said "Thank you all. I love Neil!"

Neil Young has most definitely been a very important artist in the history of American pop music and is still a great influence on other artists. Lynyrd Skynyrd's Sweet Home Alabama was written in response to two of Young's songs, Southern Man and Alabama. Young recorded Ohio with Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young this was about the tragic events at Kent State University in 1970. Young has always been politically outspoken and socially conscious and this has influenced artists such as Phish, Pearl Jam and Nirvana. Neil Young is referred to as "the Godfather of Grunge" because of the influence he had on Kurt Cobain and Eddie Vedder and the grunge movement as a whole. Kurt Cobain quoted Neil Young in his suicide note with the line "It's better to burn out, than to fade away" from Young's song "Hey Hey, My My". Because of this Young has never played this song live since. Eddie Vedder, of Pearl Jam, cited Neil as a huge influence in 1995. He has also been a big influence on experimental rock acts like Sonic Youth and Radiohead . The Australian rock group Powderfinger also attribute their group name to their love of Young. Young has influenced bands and singer-songwriters for decades.
