In geologic terms, a plate is simply a large and a rigid slab of solid rock. The word "tectonics" has been derived from the Greek root "to build." By placing these two words together, the term "plate tectonics" is obtained and it refers to the fact that the Earth's surface has been built of plates. Before the advent of the theory of plate tectonics, some people believed that the present-day continents are the result of the fragmented pieces of preexisting "supercontinents". Plate Tectonics is a model that can be used to explain the configuration of the Earth's outermost surface. The Earth's crust exists as a number of puzzle-piece-like plates.
It is actually a relatively new scientific concept which was introduced about thirty years ago and it has helped in revolutionizing our understanding of our planet Earth. The theory has also unified the study of Earth as it has drawn together different branches of earth sciences like paleontology and seismology. It has also provided explanations to a number of questions that scientists had been speculating upon for centuries. These questions are about the fact that earthquakes and volcanic eruptions have been found occur in specific areas around the world and the formation of great mountain ranges like the Himalayas and the Alps.
Plate tectonics has proved to be as important to earth sciences as the structure of atom to physics and chemistry and the theory of evolution to life sciences. Even though the theory of plate tectonics has been widely accepted by the present scientific community, but the aspects of this theory are still being debated today and ironically, one of the outstanding questions is the one that Wegener had failed to resolve which was about the nature of forces propelling the plates. Scientists are also debate the operation of plate tectonics earlier in the Earth's history and similar operation of plate tectonics on other planets in our solar system.

Most of the geological actions in the form of mountains, volcanoes, rift valleys, earthquakes, faulting are due to different types of interaction taking place at the plate boundaries.

Four major scientific developments have resulted in the formulation of the plate-tectonics theory. These are: Demonstration of the youth and ruggedness of the ocean floor. Repeated reversals of the magnetic field of Earth magnetic in the geologic past. Emergence of seafloor-spreading hypothesis along with the recycling of oceanic crust. Precise documentation of the fact that the world's earthquake and volcanic activity is actually concentrated along oceanic trenches.

The outermost part of the interior of Earth is made up of two layers. The upper part is the lithosphere , which comprises the crust and the rigid uppermost part of the mantle. Just below the lithosphere lies the asthenosphere. Though it is solid, the asthenosphere has got relatively low viscosity and shear strength. As a result, it can flow almost like a liquid on geological time scales. The mantle that is below the asthenosphere is much more rigid due to the higher pressure above it. The lithosphere is further broken up into tectonic plates in the case of Earth and as mentioned before,there are seven major and a number of minor plates. These lithospheric plates ride over the asthenosphere.


The division of the Earth's interior into lithosphere and asthenosphere is actually based on the ways that heat is transferred and in term s of mechanical differences. The lithosphere is not only cooler but also more rigid as compared to asthenosphere which is hotter and mechanically weaker. Moreover, lithosphere loses heat by the process of conduction whereas asthenosphere transfers heat by the process of convection. Plate motion ranges up to 10 to 160 mm/a depending upon the location.

The plates are about 100 km thick and they consist of lithospheric mantle which is overlain by either oceanic crust or continental crust. These two types of crust differ in terms of thickness and the continental crust is considerably thicker as compared to the oceanic crust. Tectonic plates may include continental crust or oceanic crust, and at the same time a single plate carries both. For instance, the African Plate includes the continent and also parts of the floor of Indian and Atlantic Oceans. Oceanic crust is denser as it has less silicon and more heavier elements as compared to the continental crust. As a result, the oceanic crust lies below the sea level while the continental crust is projected above the sea level.

Plate Boundaries
The lithospheric plates meet each other along a plate boundary, and these boundaries are generally associated with geological events like earthquakes and also the creation of topographic features like volcanoes, mountains and oceanic trenches. Most of the active volcanoes in the world occur along plate boundaries. Pacific Plate's Ring of Fire is the most active and most widely known.
There are three kinds of plate boundaries, which are characterized according to the relative movement of plates with respect to each other. These are also associated with different kinds of surface phenomena. The three different types of plate boundaries are: Transform or conservative boundaries Divergent boundaries Convergent boundaries or active margins 1. Transform boundaries occur where plates slide or grind past with respect to each other along transform faults. The relative motion between the two plates is either dextral or sinistral . The San Andreas Fault in California an example . Because of friction, the plates are unable to glide past each other. As a result, stress builds up in both the plates and when the stress reaches a level that exceeds the slipping-point of the rocks on either side, the accumulated potential energy is released in the form of strain or motion along the fault. The massive amount of energy released is the cause of earthquakes which is a common phenomenon along the transform boundaries. San Andrea's Fault complex is a good example of this kind of plate boundary. It is located in the western coast of North America.
2. Divergent boundaries occur where two plates move apart from each other and the space created is filled with a new crustal material that is sourced from molten magma which forms below. The origin of divergent boundaries is thought to be associated with a phenomenon called hotspots. In this case, exceedingly large convective cells are believed tom bring large quantities of hot asthenospheric material close toi the surface and the kinetic energy is sufficient to break the lithosphere apart. Hot spots can be productive sources of geothermal power and Iceland is actively developing its hotspot and is expected to be the world's first hydrogen economy within the next twenty years.

Divergent boundaries are capable of creating massive fault zones in an oceanic ridge system. Spreading in this case is generally not uniform. As a result, if spreading rates of the adjacent ridge blocks happen to be different, massive transform faults will occur. These are termed as fracture zones and these are a major source of the submarine earthquakes. A sea floor map shows a strange pattern of blocky structures which are separated by linear features.

3. Convergent boundaries occur when lithospheric plates undergo a collision. The nature of a convergent boundary is dependent upon the type of lithosphere plates that are colliding.

When a dense oceanic plate undergoes a collision with a less-dense continental plate, then in such a case the oceanic plate is thrust underneath, thus forming a subduction zone. On the surface, its topographic expression is in the form of an oceanic trench on the side of the ocean and a mountain range on the side of the continent. As organic material from the bottom of ocean is transformed and heated due to friction, a liquid magma with a tremendous amount of dissolved gasses is created. This may erupt to the surface, thus forming long chains of volcanoes. The continental spine of South America is an example of these type of volcanoes. An example of this type in North America the Cascade mountain range that extends north from California's Sierra Nevada. The Pacific ocean boundary is surrounded by very long stretches of volcanoes and is these are collectively known as The Ring of Fire.

Where two continental plates undergo a collision, the plates either compress and crumple or one plate overrides the other. In both these cases, the result is the creation of extensive mountain ranges. A dramatic effect of this action can be seen where the northern margin of the Indian subcontinental plate is being thrust under a part of the Eurasian plate, thus lifting it and creating the Himalayas. When two oceanic plates converge with each other they result in the formation an island arc due to the fact that one oceanic plate is subducted below the other oceanic plate. A good example of this kind of plate convergence is the formation of Japan.

Driving Forces of Plate Motion

Tectonic plates move due to the difference in the relative density of oceanic lithosphere and the relative weakness of the asthenosphere with respect to the lithosphere. Dissipation of heat energy from the mantle is considered to be the actual source of energy that drives plate tectonics. Though the current view is still a matter of debate but the high density of the oceanic lithosphere that is sinking in subduction zones is considered to be the most powerful cause of plate motion.

The weakness of asthenosphere permits the tectonic plates to move towards a subduction zone. Although subduction has been believed to be the strongest force that drives plates, but it cannot be considered as the only force due to the fact that there are plates like the North American Plate which are also moving without being subducted. This is also true for the movement of the enormous Eurasian Plate. As a matter of fact, the sources of plate motion are a topic of intensive research among the earth scientists.

There are essentially two kinds of forces that influence plate motion and these are friction and gravity.

1. Friction - C onvection currents in the upper part of mantle are transmitted through the asthenosphere and the relative motion of plates is driven by friction between the lithosphere and the asthenosphere. Local convection currents are believed to exert a downward frictional pull on those plates which are in subduction zones at ocean trenches.

2. Gravity - Plate motion is due to the higher elevation of plates at the ocean ridges. As cool oceanic lithosphere is considerably denser as compared the hot mantle material from which it has been derived, with increasing thickness it subsides gradually into the mantle in order to compensate the greater load. This results in a slight lateral incline with distance from the ridge axis. In geological literature in lower education the process is generally referred to as "ridge-push" but it is actually a misnomer as nothing is actually "pushing" as tensional features are dominant along the ridges. It is more accurately known as gravitational sliding.
Plate motion is partly driven due to the weight of cold, dense plates which are sinking into the mantle at trenches. Considerable evidence has been found which suggests that convection is occurring in the mantle. The up-welling of material at the location of mid-ocean ridges is certainly part of this convection. Slab pull is thought to be the greatest force that is acting on the plates. Recent models have indicated that trench suction also plays an important role. However, it must be noted that the North American Plate is nowhere being subducted and yet it is in a state of motion. Likewise the Eurasian, African and the Antarctic Plates. The overall driving force of plate motion and its source of energy remain subjects of ongoing research.
Relative significance of each mechanism





The actual vector of a plate's motion must be a function of all the forces that act upon the plate but remains a problem about the degree to which each process contributes to the motion of each and every tectonic plate.


The diversity of geodynamic properties of each and every plate must obviously result in differences in the degree to which these processes are actively driving the plates. One method of dealing with the problem is to consider the relative rate at which each and every plate is moving and also consider the available evidence of each driving force upon the plate.


One of the most significant correlations that has been found is that the lithospheric plates attached to downgoing or subducting plates move much faster as compared to the plates which are not attached to the subducting plates. For instance, the pacific plate is essentially surrounded by zones of subduction (called Ring of Fire) and it moves much faster as compared to the plates of the Atlantic basin, which are attached to the adjacent continents instead of the subducting plates. So, it is thought that the forces associated with the downgoing plate are the driving forces which are responsible for the motion of plates.


The driving forces of plate motion are very active subjects of the on-going discussion and research in the field of Geophysics.


Explanation of magnetic striping


The discovery of magnetic striping being symmetrical around the crests of mid-ocean ridges suggested a clear relationship. During the year 1961, scientists began to develop a theory that the mid-ocean ridges indicate structurally weak zones where the ocean floor was getting ripped in two, lengthwise along the ridge crest. New magma from within the Earth easily rises through these weak zones and it eventually erupts along the crest of the ridges in order to create new oceanic crust. This process, which was later known as seafloor spreading and operating over millions of years, still continues to form new ocean flooracross the fifty thousand km-long system of mid-ocean ridges. This explanation was supported by the following lines of evidence:


1. The youngest rocks located at the ridge crest are always found to have the present-day (normal) polarity.


2. At or near the crest of a ridge, the rocks are quite young, and these rocks become progressively older away from the ridge crest.

3. Stripes of rock which are parallel to the ridge crest alternate in their magnetic polarity. This suggests that the Earth's magnetic field must have flip-flopped a number of times.
By explaining both the construction of mid-ocean ridge system and zebra like magnetic striping, the seafloor spreading hypothesis easily gained converts and represented another major advancement in the development of the plate-tectonics theory. Moreover, the oceanic crust came to be appreciated as a natural "tape recording" system of the history of the reversals of Earth's magnetic field.


Mapping with earthquakes





During the 20th century, improvements in the field of seismic instrumentation and ever increasing use of earthquake-recording instruments or seismographs all over the world enabled the scientists to understand that earthquakes are concentrated in certain areas which are notably along the oceanic trenches and the spreading ridges. By late 1920s, seismologists started identifying several prominent earthquake zones which were parallel to the trenches which were typically were inclined at 40-60 degrees from the horizontal and these zones extended several hundred kilometers into the Earth.


Later on, these zones were known as Wadati-Benioff zones in honor of the seismologists who are able to first recognize them. Kiyoo Wadati was from Japan and Hugo Benioff was from the United States. The study of the global seismicity further advanced in the 1960s as a result of the establishment of theWorldwide Standardized Seismograph Network or WWSSN used to monitor the compliance of the 1963 treaty which banned the above-ground testing of any nuclear weapons. The data from the WWSSN instruments helped the seismologists to map precisely the earthquake concentration zones all over the world.


There are seven major crustal plates, which are further subdivided into a number of smaller plates .The major plates are:


African Plate that covers Africa
Antarctic Plate that covers Antarctica
Australian Plate that covers Australia
Eurasian Plate that covers Eurasia
North American Plate that covers North America and north-east Siberia
South American Plate that covers South America
Pacific Platethat covers the Pacific Ocean



The notable minor plates include the Arabian Plate and the Indian Plate.


The movement of plates has resulted in the formation and breakup of continents with the passage of time, which includes occasional formation of a supercontinent that contains most of the continents. The super-continent of Rodinia is believed to have been formed about 1000 million years ago and it is also believed to have embodied most of the Earth's continents, and then broken up into eight continents about 600 million years ago. The eight continents later on re-assembled into another super-continent known as Pangaea which eventually broke up into Laurasia and Gondwana. Laurasia became North America and Eurasia and Gondwana became the rest.




Continental Drift
The continental drift is basically an ancient forerunner in the theory of plate tectonics. It suggests that all the continents have migrated to their present position following the breakup of a single landmass or super continent called Pangaea which means "all lands" in Greek.
The diagrams shown above illustrate the break-up of the super continent called Pangaea., According to this theory, Pangaea or the super continent began to break up about 225 to 200 million years ago.
Evidence of Continental Drift
The theory of continental drift was originally developed due to the similarity observed in the shape of South American and African shorelines. This causes them to appear as if they had been once joined together. The occurrences of plant and animal fossils and unusual geologic structures on these matching coastlines offered further substantiation, because the coastlines are widely separated by the vast Atlantic Ocean. It was argued that it was physically and practically impossible for most of these similarities to have swum or transported across the vast stretch of oceans between them. Moreover, the presence of identical fossils along the coastal belts of Africa and South America was one of the most compelling evidence that these two continents were once joined together.

After the break-up of Pangaea, the theory of drifting of continents not only explained the matching fossil occurrences but it also explained the evidence of dramatic climatic changes on some continents. For instance, the discovery of tropical plants' fossils in the form of coal deposits in the continent of Antarctica easily led to the conclusion that this frozen landmass must have been previously situated closer to the equator. As a matter of fact it had more temperate climate where lush and swampy vegetation could possibly grow. Other examples of mismatches of geology and climatic conditions include distinctive fossil ferns discovered in the now-polar regions and also the occurrence of glacial deposits in the present-day arid Africa.

History of The Theory of Continental Drift

The belief that the continents were always fixed in their present positions was first of all suggested as early as the year 1596 by a Dutch map maker Abraham Ortelius in one of his works called "Thesaurus Geographicus". He suggested that South America and North America were "torn away from the continents of Europe and Africa as a result of earthquakes and floods." He suggested that the rupture reveals itself if you bring forward a world map and consider carefully the coast lines of these three continents.

Today, most of the scientists believe that the earth was once a super-continent and at present, we have a lot of information on our planet as a result of mapping the ocean floor by making use of sound waves, measurement of magnetic field above the seafloor and by locating earthquakes with the help of world-wide network of seismographers.

It was not until the year 1912 that the idea of shifting continents was seriously considered in the form of a full-blown scientific theory called "Continental Drift" was introduced in articles published by a German meteorologist named Alfred Lothar Wegener. He suggested that, around 200 million years ago, the supercontinent called Pangaea began to split apart. Alexander Du Toit, a Professor in the field of Geology at Johannesburg University proposed that Pangaea must have first broken into two large continental landmasses, called Laurasia located in in the northern hemisphere and Gondwanaland located in the southern hemisphere. Later on, Laurasia and Gondwanaland continued breaking apart into the various smaller continents as they exist today.

The theory of continental drift would have become a spark that ignited a different way of viewing the Earth. But unfortunately, at the time when Wegener introduced this theory, the scientists of his time firmly believed the continents and oceans were permanent features on the surface of Earth. As a result, his proposal was not well received at that time, in-spite of the fact that it seemed to agree with the scientific information which was available at that time. A fatal weakness found in Wegener's theory was the fact that it wasn't able to satisfactorily answer a fundamental question raised by most of his critics: Which forces could be so strong that they could move such large masses of solid rocks over such great distances? Wegener suggested that this was due to the fact that the continents simply plowed through the ocean floor but his answer was not acceptable at that time.

Undaunted by the rejection, Wegener decided to devote the rest of his life in doggedly pursuing additional evidence to support his theory. He froze to death in the year 1930 during an expedition while crossing the Greenland ice cap and after his death, new evidence collected from ocean floor exploration rekindled interest in Wegener's theory. This ultimately led to the development of the plate tectonics. Geological paradigm shift

The acceptance of the theories of sea floor spreading and continental drift which are the two key elements of plate tectonics can be compared to the Copernican revolution in astronomy. Within a span of only several years, geophysics and geology were revolutionized. The parallel facts are quite striking in the two cases. Just as pre-Copernican astronomy was quite descriptive but unable to provide explanations about the motions of celestial objects, in the same manner, the pre-tectonic plate geological theories described the observation but could not provide any fundamental mechanisms. Before the acceptance of plate tectonics, the field of geology was trapped in a "pre-Copernican" box.

On the other hand, as compared to astronomy, the geological revolution was much faster. What had actually been rejected for decades by the respectable scientific journals was eagerly accepted within a short span of few years in the 1960s and 1970s.

One simply needs to read the pre-plate descriptions of why the Himalaya or Alps exist to understand the difference. In an attempt to answer questions like "How can those rocks which are clearly marine in origin exist thousands of meters above the sea-level in the Dolomites?", or "How did the concave and convex margins of the Alpine chain form?", true insight to these questions was hidden by the complexity that boiled down to technical jargon. There wasn't enough fundamental insight about the underlying mechanics.

With the help of plate tectonics, the answers to such questions quickly fell into place or at least path to the answers became clear. Collisions of converging plates resulted in enough force to lift the sea floor to considerable heights. The cause of marine trenches which are oddly placed just off island arcs or continents along with their associated volcanoes became clear when the process of subduction at converging plates was understood.

Now the mysteries were no longer considered as mysteries. Forests of complex answers were swept away. What is the reason of striking parallels in geology of different parts of Africa and South America? Why do Africa and South America look like two pieces that could fit like a jigsaw puzzle? In order to understand the answers to these questions, you need to look at some pre-tectonics explanations. Plate tectonics on other planets

1. On Mars


As a result of observations of the magnetic fields on Mars during 1999 by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft, it was proposed that the mechanism of plate tectonics might have been active once on this planet. 2. On Venus


Venus has shown no evidence of active plate tectonics. There has been a debatable evidence of active tectonics in the distant past of this planet but the events (like plausible and generally accepted hypothesis that the lithosphere of Venus has thickened considerably over the course of several hundred million years) taking place since then have made constraining the course of the geologic record of this planet difficult. ON the other hand, numerous well-preserved impact craters have been utilized as a dating method to date the Venusian surface approximately. Dates derived so far are the dominantly in the range 500 Mya to 750Mya, although ages up to 1.2 Gya have also been calculated. This research has led to a fairly well accepted hypothesis according to which Venus has undergone a complete volcanic resurfacing at least once in its past. It is estimated that the last event might have taken place approximately within the range of the estimated surface ages. Though the mechanism of such an impressionable thermal event still remains a debated issue in Venusian geosciences, some geo-scientists believe in processes involving plate motion to some extent.

3.Galilean satellites

In spite of the fact that the materials and specific mechanisms may be different from plate-tectonic activity on Earth but some satellites of Jupiter have those features which may be related to plate-tectonic style deformation.


