Definition: Keyboard, Electronic:
In computing terminology, a keyboard is an input device, somewhat modeled after the typewriter keyboard, which uses an arrangement of buttons or keys that then function as electronic switches. A keyboard typically has characters engraved or printed on the keys, and each press of a key typically corresponds to a single displayed character or symbol. However, to produce certain infrequently used symbols, requires the operator to press and hold a couple of keys simultaneously. Some keyboard keys produce letters, numbers or signs (characters), other keys or simultaneous key depressions can produce actions or computer commands. During normal usage, the keyboard is used to type text or numerics into a word processor, text editor or other systems program. In a modern computer, the interpretation of key depressions is the software's responsibility. A computer keyboard distinguishes each physical key from any other, and reports all key presses to the controlling software. These days, keyboards are the main focus of computer gaming - either with regular keyboards or by using specific gaming keyboards, which can memorize and expedite frequently-used keystroke combinations. Keyboards are also used to give commands to the operating system of a computer, such as the "Windows' Control-Alt-Delete" combination, which shuts down the entire system.


History of the Electronic Keyboard
Austin, Texas, USA. lays claim to the design and production of the very first electronic keyboard. The year was 1962. Design was by Daniel Guermeur, who also founded the Metadot Corporation, an open source software company. Guermeur noticed that "hunting" and "pecking" was not very efficient for someone used to spending most of the day typing on a computer. He was seeking a radical solution which would prevent him from looking at existing key options. This led to a Chinese factory making his first blank keyboard. After just a few seconds of use, the cheap, rubber-membrane keyboard was giving atrocious tactile feedback. So, Guermeur decided that blank keys were not enough to type fast, especially if the operator had a poor memory! Moreover, the keyboard component quality was vital too. Guermeur then had another manufacturer make the best quality keyboard they could come up with, adding the blank keys. After few weeks of usage Daniel doubled his typing speed. So, back to the drawing board really worked well for Guermeur! Friends and colleagues asked him many times where they could buy a blank keyboard like his, but this was a one-of-a-kind keyboard. After he noticed a wide interest in this "blank" typing device, he decided to launch a new product line focusing exclusively on providing the best quality keyboard equipment available on the market. The first week after the launch of the first Das Keyboard, its website got several million hits and was mentioned numerous blogs and leading newspapers including Slashdot and the New York Times. Incredible, but true!


Did You Know?

"QWERTY" FAQs

Why are the keys arranged the way they are on a "QWERTY" keyboard? The first commercial typewriter, called the Remington Number 1, was designed by Christopher Sholes and used the "QWERTY" keyboard we are all familiar with. The story goes that he arranged the keys with the most common letters in hard-to-reach spots, to slow typists down and keep the typewriter from jamming.

OPTICAL MOUSE
How does the sensor on an optical mouse work? Most optical mice use a small, red light-emitting diode (LED) that bounces light off that surface onto a complimentary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) sensor. A recent innovation is a laser-based optical mouse sensor that detects more surface details compared to LED technology.

KEYBOARD TO MONITOR TRACKING
How does what I type on my keyboard show up on my computer monitor? As you type, the processor in the keyboard analyzes the key matrix and determines what characters to send to the computer. It maintains these characters in its memory buffer and then sends the data.


Third Review: Logitech G15 Gaming Keyboard Pros: Programable keys, LCD screen, back lit keys, option to disable windows key, programmable keys Cons: Not wireless Summary: Ok, I will not be typing up a huge 8 paragraph review on why this keyboard is great and all. It is a keyboard and I give it a 9 because it does what it is meant to do and adds extras. I don't care about the LCD screen that much, but I do love the back lit keys. Also a very handy feature is the ability to disable that windows button on the bottom left of the keyboard. One gripe; not wireless. I wish it was a wireless keyboard, if it was, it would have been perfect. However all in all it's an excellent keyboard, can't go wrong with this thing.



Electronic Keyboards (General) Paint a sound picture Most electronic keyboards have 88 keys to accommodate all your playing options. You can also layer , or combine specific sounds for a customized arrangement. When you are really up to speed, you can even split the keyboard and assign patches too.

Electronic keyboards can produce sounds that go beyond a few simple patches. There are more and more options every month, and you don't only have to play music from the sheet book. Consider what the Korg Triton LE can do for you. Just imagine hearing horns, flutes or strings in a really stirring rendition of "How Great Thou Art" or other great hymns, while you by play from the hymn book arrangement. Sequencing your songs Electronic keyboards can help you learn to sequence, or queue other instruments. This is great for those times when other players are not available. Sundays are particularly worrying because you know that one of your crucial players could cancel at the last moment.

How nice then to have a complete band sound even when one member of your orchestra has not pitched up! Electronic keyboards are also great for those newer players with less experience. All they need do is listen to the part that you sequenced for them, while the band plays merrily along .
"Ramp up a Vamp" Moving from one song to the next can be a challenge. For example, as you finish a quiet and sombre song, you may have vamp up for the next one which could be far more intense. No problem with the electronic keyboard. Electronic keyboards can help you ramp up a vamp, build a musical arrangement and let the keyboard play it for you too, adjusting dynamics, phrasing and other musical elements in the process. Perhaps you need a few minutes to get everything set on stage before the performance begins? Not very impressive if you are disengaged while everyone else is waiting for you to set up. The answer: simply write a transition vamp.
The Touch of a Real Piano Electronic keyboards include a digital piano that provides the touch a classically-trained pianist wants and is accustomed to. Of course, different brands offer different levels of feel, so it a good idea to play several tunes and compare. Generally, however, the Kurzweil has a slightly lighter touch, while the Yamaha is on the heavy side - which is closest to an acoustic grand piano - while the Roland usually lands somewhere in the middle. You should choose a digital piano with 88 keys to satisfy the more advanced sets with your other players.
Add some Spice... A digital piano has some patches, or sounds, but not as many as a synthesized workstation. Still, the additional sounds can sweeten or spice up the basic classical piano sound, which is all well covered by the leading digital piano makers. Expect to find at the least some strings, organ, voices and alternative piano patches on basic manufacturer's electronic keyboards. Midi Compatibility Now here's a truly great thing. When you need a break from the sound of the patches in your digital piano, or they just need to be freshened up, with midi, you just hook up a sound module, and instantly include as many additional sounds as you have available.

Midi Controllers

MIDI controllers are devices that are able to transmit performance related MIDI events. The most common type of MIDI controller consists of a keyboard without a sound module. In other words, the instrument produces no sound of its own. Instead, it generates MIDI events from the keyboard. A good keyboard controller usually will have weighted keys that have the "feel" and "response" of a piano. Midi keyboard controllers usually have 76 or 88 keys. You should choose 88 keys for the greater value for your bucks - the rest of your band will be happy too. Why you should consider one If you have some accomplished musicians, or perhaps that should be technicians, they will be accustomed to programming electronic keyboards with their own sound preferences. For them, a MIDI controller may be the best purchase you can make for a keyboard shared by experienced MIDI musicians. Talk about it all coming together!
Suggestions for Specific Keyboard Instruments You don't have thousands to spend, but your need is real? Consider a Casio Keyboard. You're serious about buying a keyboard, but "new" is beyond your means at this point? Study up the Roland XP-80. Want to learn to play piano on line. With free sheet music, tips and music resources too? Read music gear news, including new product information and consumer reviews - covering guitar, bass, drums & percussion, keyboards, synthesizers, MIDI, recording, live sound and more. The Yamaha keyboard reviews and buying guide is a great resourece. Models covered include digital pianos, and PSR, portable, and mini keyboards and accessories.

Fifth Review: Gateway FX7026 Desktop Review

The Gateway FX7026 offers a loaded computer that can go head-to-head with other high-end gaming and media-heavy machines, thus c ontinuing in its line of desktop computers with quad-core processors. At $1,099, the price tag is more than fair for the number of high performance features, and compares similarly to a DIY setup. If you have a restricted budget, but still want the advantages of a quad-core system, then take a look at the Gateway GT5674. This is a basic low-cost desktop with a 2.2GHz AMD Phenom 9500. If you're after even more as a gamer, and you want a system that can play current-release titles as well, you'll appreciate the Gateway FX7026's increased storage, memory, and processor speed. Totally awesome!


The FX7026 is housed in a sleek, carbon fiber black chassis with matt-black and metallic orange highlights that make this keyboard really attractive . The front panel of the tower incorporates a 18x DVD-RW drive with an extra drive slot and expansion bay below for portable storage. We really liked the fact that the 15-in-1 media card reader is located at the top of the tower; many modern desktops position this at the bottom, making it difficult to reach when it's at floor level. The convenient "copy" button for quick data transfers is really useful too. Gateway includes a basic two-button USB mouse and a full-size PS/2 keyboard with the FX7026, both wired. The keyboard has an integrated faux-leather wrist pad as well as a set of buttons to navigate through digital media. We were disappointed to see that Gateway includes its generic desktop speakers that draw power from the USB, producing a disappointingly diluted effect when used to play high-quality MP3s and game sound effects. You don't need tools to open the tower, just unscrew two large knobs and you'll have full access to the FX7026's guts. Under the hood you'll find the Intel Core 2 Quad Q9300 2.5GHz processor, two 320GB SATA II hard drives running at 7,200rpm, and 4GB of SDRAM. The computer also comes with a fairly decent video card and an over-clocked NVIDIA GeForce 8800GT 512MB with ports for DVI, VGA, and TV Out that will make it through the majority of today's games. Serious hard-core gamers will also be disappointed to hear that the Gateway's motherboard is not SLI compatible. We're not surprised considering the low overall price though. What did impress us was the FX7026 flagship with 64-bit Windows Vista Home Premium, which takes full advantage of the 4GB of RAM included with the system, and even leaves room to upgrade. Performance

In our CNET Labs tests, we threw in the $1,500 Maingear Prelude to compare gaming scores, since the other two systems reviewed only have integrated graphics. Consider that we don't have many systems in this price-range with quad-core processors other than the Gateway GT5674 and the older Acer Aspire M5100.
We were pleasantly surprised by the FX7026's application scores. The Gateway's combination of a fast 2.5GHz CPU and 64-bit Vista putting all 4GB of RAM to work, put it on top of even the more expensive Maingear system, and by a large margin too. We didn't expect the Gateway to outperform the Maingear and its SLI graphics cards on our gaming tests, but the FX7026 did well enough on Unreal Tournament 3, and it actually edged out the Maingear by a small margin on our low-resolution Crysis. Neither system can really play Crysis at higher settings, so in terms of relevant performance the Gateway is an outstanding device for its price. Service and support

The FX7026 is covered by Gateway's limited one year warranty that covers parts and labor. You can also get support from a 24/7 call center for troubleshooting and basic problem-solving, or you can visit Gateway's Website. To help you troubleshoot problems yourself at home, Gateway also provides BigFix software on the system itself. All of these support features are on a par with those from other desktop vendors we've seen.

The design featured on the studio's website received attention when it was featured on Slashdot on 14 July 2005, and afterwards for a few weeks on other technology sites. The original release date was "end of 2006", however production issues caused the Optimus mini-three to be developed first, with the full keyboard release delayed until the end of 2007. The keyboard was Number 10 in the Wired Magazine 2006 Vaporware Awards, and Number 4 on the list in 2007 (due to its numerous delays and feature reductions).

The Optimus allows for greater user interaction by dynamically displaying the current function of the keys. For example, when the user presses the shift key the pictures change to upper-case versions. This also makes switching between different keyboard layouts (such as English and Cyrillic) rapid, and could make the switch to alternative layouts such as Dvorak easier for people who only have a QWERTY keyboard with no possibility of rearranging the keys. There are computer renderings showing sample layouts for Quake III Arena and Adobe Photoshop to demonstrate this concept A newly-revealed patent application filed on March 13, 2007 suggests that Apple Inc. may be working on a similar dynamically changeable OLED keyboard.

Optimus Mini Three Art Lebedev Studio has released a smaller three-key version of their keyboard, named Optimus mini three. Each of the keys is larger than a standard key. The mini three can be adjusted through configuration software to either a horizontal or vertical orientation. Initial reviews have been mixed. Although the keyboard functions are as advertised, it has been criticized for inordinately high CPU usage, slow response time, and buggy configuration software.

Optimus Aux On July 21, 2008, Engadget posted about a new version of their keyboard named Optimus Pultius. It features 15 OLED keys in a three-by-five arrangement and a USB port. It was expected to be released in late 2008 or early 2009. On September 19, 2008, Engadget also reported that the Pultius had been renamed to the Aux, and included a new rendering of the rear side showing that there would be two USB ports instead of one.

Production schedule Some reports indicated that the keyboards started shipping on February 21, 2008. Since then, delivery has been regular.


Variations Variations with fewer OLED keys are also available, with each upgradeable by replacing static keys with OLED keys after purchase. For keyboards with less than a full complement of OLED "active keys", additional keys can be purchased and installed later.
