It is a medium sized star which is located at the centre of the Solar System.

The Sun is the closest star to Earth and it is a huge mass of hot, glowing gas.

The Earth and other heavenly bodies that include other planets, asteroids, meteoroids, comets and dust orbit around the Sun, which by itself accounts for about 99.8% of the mass of the solar system.

It is a huge mass of hot, glowing gas. The strong gravitational pull of the Sun holds Earth and the other planets in the solar system in orbit. The Sun's light and heat influence all of the objects in the solar system and allow life to exist on Earth.


The Sun is located at the centre of the Milky Way galaxy which is at a distance of about 26,000 light-years from the galactic center. It completes one revolution in about 225-250 million years at an approximate orbital speed of 220 kilometers per second. These measurements of galactic distance and speed are as accurate as we can get according to our current knowledge, but these may change as we learn more. Of the 50 nearest stellar systems which are located within 17 light years from our Earth, the Sun ranks 4th in terms of absolute magnitude.

The surface composition of the Sun consists of hydrogen, helium and and trace quantities of other elements which include Fe,Ni, O, Si, S, Mg, C, Ne, Ca, and Cr. Hydrogen contributes about 74% of its mass, or 92% of its volume and helium contributes about 24-25% of its mass or 7% of volume.

The Sun is large and massive as compared to the other heavenly bodies in the solar system. To be more precise, the Sun's radius is 695,508 km, 109 times as large as Earth's radius. The Sun has a mass of 1.989 X 1027 metric tons. This number is very large. Written out, it would be the digits 1989 followed by 24 zeroes.

It is 333,000 times as massive as Earth. Despite its large mass, the Sun has a lower density than Earth. The Sun's average density is only 1.409 g/cu cm, which is a quarter of the average density of Earth.

From Earth the Sun looks small, because of its distance from the earth and its average distance from Earth is 150 million km (93 million mi).



The Sun has a spectral class of G2V. G2 indicates that it has a surface temperature of approximately 5,780 K which gives it a white color. The Sun appears yellow when seen from the surface of the Earth. This is due to the preferential scattering of blue photons. The scattering blue light results in residual reddishness and is perceived as yellow. Its spectrum consists of lines of ionized and neutral metals along with very weak hydrogen lines. The suffix "V" indicates that the Sun, like most of the stars, is a main sequence star. In other words, it generates its energy by the process of nuclear fusion of four hydrogen nuclei into a single helium nucleus and is in a state of hydrostatic equilibrium, neither contracting nor expanding with time. There are more than 100 million G2 class stars in our galaxy. Once regarded as a small and relatively insignificant star, the Sun is now known to be brighter than 85% of the stars in the galaxy, most of which are red dwarfs.

The figure shows an illustration of the structure of the Sun. Different parts shown in the figure are:
1. Core
2. Radiative zone
3. Convective zone
4. Photosphere
5. Chromosphere
6. Corona
7. Sunspot
8. Granules
9. Prominence

The Sun does not have a definite boundary like the rocky planets and in its outer parts, the density of the gases drops almost exponentially with increasing distance from its center. Nevertheless, it has got a well-defined interior structure. The solar interior is not directly observable, and the Sun itself is opaque to electromagnetic radiation. Just as seismology uses waves generated by earthquakes to reveal the interior structure of the Earth, the discipline of helioseismology uses pressure waves traversing the Sun's interior to measure and visualize the star's inner structure. Computer modeling of the Sun is also used as a theoretical tool to investigate the deeper layers of the Sun.

The Interior of the Sun

The Sun derives its energy by nuclear fusion that takes place in a small central core .

The solar core comprises 10 percent of its total volume, but 40 percent of its total mass.

Temperatures in the core are estimated at about 15,000,000 C. The pressures necessary to contain such incredibly hot gases are enormous. Deep in the Sun, energy escapes outward by radiation, but near the surface of the Sun convection occurs, and the Sun's heat is transported by rising currents of hot gas. It takes several thousand years for energy to get from the core to the surface of the Sun. Outer Layers of the Sun

The Sun has three visible layers. These are Photosphere, Chromosphere and Corona

Photosphere - The bright surface that is visible to us is the innermost layer, called photosphere. The photosphere looks sharply-defined, but actually the Sun has no solid surface. Deep inside the Sun, electrons are torn free from the atoms and these electrons absorb photons of light. We see down into the Sun to the level where its gases become opaque which is at a distance of about 300 km. This distance is negligible as compared to the Sun's diameter. So the Sun appears to have a very sharp outline. The surface temperature of the Sun is approximately 5,500 C.

Chromosphere - Above the photosphere is the layer of chromosphere, which is about 5000 miles deep. This layer emits faint light of its own, mostly bright red light emitted by hydrogen atoms. During a total solar eclipse, when the photosphere is covered by the moon, the chromosphere becomes briefly visible as a thin red rim of light. Thin and faint as the chromosphere is, in one way it is the most important layer of the Sun. As light from the photosphere shines through the chromosphere, the relatively cool gases of the chromosphere absorb some of the light. The absorption of light by the particles of chromosphere makes spectroscopy possible and this enables the astronomers to determine the chemical composition of the Sun.

It is called the chromosphere from the Greek root chroma which means color, because the chromosphere is visible as a colored flash at the beginning and at the end of total eclipses of the Sun. The temperature in the chromosphere increases gradually with altitude, ranging up to around 100,000 K near the top.

Above the chromosphere is a transition region in which the temperature rises rapidly from around 100,000 K to coronal temperatures which are close to one million K. The increase is because of a phase transition as helium within the region becomes fully ionized due to the the high temperatures. The transition region does not occur at a well-defined altitude. Rather, it forms a kind of nimbus around chromospheric features such as spicules and filaments. It is in state of constant, chaotic motion. The transition region is not easily visible from Earth's surface, but is readily observable from space by instruments sensitive to the far ultraviolet portion of the spectrum.



- Corona is also visible during a total solar eclipse. It is the outermost layer of the Sun which appears as a ghostly white halo reaching out 500,000 or more miles until it fades into invisibility. Although very thin, the coronal gases are also very hot, over 1,000,000 degrees. Nobody is quite sure yet why the corona is so hot.

The corona is the extended outer atmosphere of the Sun and it is much larger in volume than the Sun itself. The corona merges smoothly with the solar wind which fills the Solar system and the heliosphere. All matter in the Sun is in the form of gas and plasma due to its high temperatures. This makes it possible for the Sun to rotate faster at its equator as compared to the higher latitudes. The differential rotation of the Sun's latitudes causes its magnetic field lines to become twisted together over time, thus causing magnetic field loops to erupt from the Sun's surface and trigger the formation of the Sun's dramatic sunspots and solar prominences . This twisting action gives rise to the solar dynamo and an eleven year solar cycle of magnetic activity as the Sun's magnetic field reverses itself about every eleven years.



The changing magnetic field gives rise to a number of effects that are collectively termed as solar activity, including sunspots, solar flares and variations in solar wind. Effects of this activity on Earth include auroras and the disruption of radio communications and electric power. It is believed that solar activity has played an important role in the formation and evolution of the Solar System. This activity also changes the structure of Earth's outer atmosphere.



When Galileo first observed the Sun in detail, he saw dark spots on its surface, carried around by the Sun's rotation. For centuries, astronomers wondered whether they were clouds floating in the Sun's atmosphere but now we know that they really are huge regions of magnetic field. For some reason the field slows down the flow of heat from the Sun's interior and keeps sunspots slightly cooler than their surroundings.

Observations of sunspots from day to day show that the Sun also rotates loke Earth. Small Sunspots persist for a week or so, but large ones may last for several rotations of the Sun. Sunspots appear dark only because they are cooler and less luminous as compared to the average surface of the Sun. In reality, Sunspots are hotter than many stars and give off appreciable light of their own. It has been found that the sunspots come and go in a cycle of about 11 years. Often the first spots of a new cycle appear before the last spots of an old cycle have disappeared.



Solar Flares

Because sunlight is very bright, astronomers filter it down to a narrow band of colors emitted by some specific atom, and still have enough brightness left to observe the Sun in detail. Pictures of the Sun in such filtered light show more details as compared to the pictures taken in plain sunlight. When the Sun is observed in the light of such spectral lines, a sudden brightening is now and then observed near sunspots, at times expanding tens of thousands of kilometers in a matter of a few minutes. Such abrupt events were named solar flares. What made them especially interesting was the fact that occasionally, after a prominent flare, a magnetic storm would erupt on Earth. This suggested that the flare released some disturbance which traveled through space and it took a day or two to reach the Earth. Considering the vastness of interplanetary space, a tremendous amount of energy had to be released in a very short time to produce this effect.
A century later we know a great deal more about flares, but have yet to trace the process of their energy release. It is generally held that the energy is drawn from the magnetic field, not just because of the close association between flares and sunspots, but also because theoretically only magnetic fields are capable of releasing energy so quickly. Unfortunately, it apparently happens at the higher levels of the Sun's atmosphere, and no good way exists of observing the magnetic field there.

Another feature of the photosphere is granulation , a polygonal pattern of light patches with dark boundaries. A typical granule is about 300 miles across and lasts for a few minutes. Granules are almost certainly convection cells , where hot gases rise in the interior of the granule and cooler gases sink along the boundary. Granules are grouped into a larger pattern, called supergranulation which are are about 25,000 miles across.



Energetic particles and magnetic storms are also observed at Earth without any exceptional flare activity preceding them. These have been associated with a different solar phenomenon called "Coronal Mass Ejections" (CMEs), which are huge bubble-shaped disturbances rising above active sunspot regions. These are expanding as they rise. Some CMEs come with flares, some don't, and many scientists nowadays feel that CMEs are more frequently associated than flares with the rapid release of magnetic energy on the Sun. The real mystery, is the release process itself. CMEs heading straight for the Earth are not easy to observe, as they are seen against the background of the bright Sunlight. Nevertheless, instruments aboard the solar observatory SOHO , launched in 1996 , are able to do so, and these have been used since early 1997 in space weather prediction .

Solar Disturbances and the Earth

Solar disturbances ebb and flow with the Sunspot cycle and these are related to the disturbances on earth. Prominences and flares in emit streams of electrons and protons that reach the earth within a day or so after eruption. These particles are trapped in the earth's magnetic field until they build up to a great density to break free. Then bursts of these particles strike the magnetic polar regions of the Earth to cause displays of the aurora and generate enormous electric currents in the upper atmosphere. This can disrupt communications and even damage equipment. Fortunately, since it takes a day for these particles to reach the earth, it is possible to monitor the Sun and issue warnings when ever major disturbances occur.

The sun moves through space taking along with it a larger family of objects. The whole group is called the solar system. The sun is the biggest object in our solar system. The solar system is elliptical in shape. The sun is the center of the solar system ans the solar system is always in motion. Its largest and most important members are the eight known planets and their moons, along with smaller objects called comets, asteroids, and meteoroids that orbit around the sun.
It is believed that the solar system was formed when a cloud of gases and dust in space was disturbed which could have been due to an explosion of a nearby star called SUPERNOVA. This explosion might have made waves in space that squeezed the cloud of gases and dust. Squeezing made the cloud collapse, as gravity pulled the gas and dust together, thus forming a solar nebula. The sun's nuclear fires ignited at the dense center of this nebula and the planets were born in the swirling currents of the great cloud.

The planets Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, that are present near the Sun, evolved as globes of rock . They were too small and their gravitational fields were quite weak. However, far from the sun, the massive planets Jupiter and Saturn, with powerful gravitational fields were able to attract and hold thick gaseous atmospheres of Hydrogen and Helium.



We expect that the Sun will eventually change, because at some point, all of the hydrogen in the core of Sun will get converted into helium, so there won't be any left for nuclear reactions. The hydrogen in the center will run out first, leaving a helium core with a shell of nuclear reactions around it. When the hydrogen is depleted, there will be nothing keeping the center of the Sun hotter than the outside, so there will be no pressure which balances gravity. Consequently, the central regions of the Sun will begin to contract. As the core of the Sun contracts, the central regions will heat up. Eventually it will get hot enough for another nuclear reaction to start. This reaction changes three Helium atoms into one Carbon atom. This nuclear reaction keeps it hotter in the center, so the Sun will stabilize for a while. Again, the core of the Sun will contract, because nothing will balance the inward gravitational force. As the core of the Sun gets denser and denser, the core material eventually changes state into a kind of matter called degenerate matter. Degenerate matter has the property that it provides outward pressure even when energy is not being generated. This electron pressure will stop the collapse of our Sun. When this sets in, the core of the the Sun will be essentially pure carbon. The outer regions of the Sun will most likely be blown off of the Sun during the later stages of its evolution and return to interstellar space. We observe this for other stars that have reached the end of their life. Consequently, at the end of its lifetime, our model predicts that the Sun will be a dense, hot, carbon core which will gradually cool off.



Although Sun is the nearest star to Earth, many questions about it still remain unanswered. Current topics of scientific inquiry include the Sun's regular cycle of sunspot activity, the magnetic interaction between chromosphere and the corona, the physics and origin of flares and prominences, and the origin of solar wind.



Without Sun, the Earth would have been lifeless ball of rock and ice. The Sun warms our planet, creates our weather, and gives energy to plants providing food and energy to support life on Earth. Energy released from the Sun radiates in all directions, reaching the Earth and other planets. The further the planet is from the Sun, the lesser energy it receives.



The temperature of the outer, visible part of the Sun is 5500C.



It is only because the inner parts of the Sun are much hotter than the outer parts, that the Sun does not collapse under its own gravity. The atoms in the central regions move faster than those in outer regions and consequently they push outwards with more force, holding the Sun up. The force which they exert is described by the pressure; the internal pressure is higher than the external pressure, so the Sun is held up against gravitational collapse



Solar energy, which is in the form of heat and light, supports life on Earth by the process of photosynthesis and at the same time, Earth's climate and weather are dependent on it

. Light from the Sun takes about eight minutes to reach Earth. The oceans and seas store the heat energy and help keep the temperature of Earth at a level that allows life to exist on Earth. Plants use the Sun's energy to make food, and plants provide food for other organisms. The Sun's energy also creates wind in Earth's atmosphere.



Observation and eye damage

Sunlight is very bright and looking directly at the Sun with the naked eye even for brief periods can be painful. Looking directly at the Sun causes phosphene visual artifacts and temporary partial blindness. It also delivers about 4 milliwatts of sunlight to the retina, slightly heating it and potentially causing damage in eyes that cannot respond properly to the brightness. UV exposure gradually yellows the lens of the eye over a period of years and is thought to result in the formation of cataracts, but this depends on general exposure to solar UV and not on whether one looks directly at the Sun. Long-duration viewing of the direct Sun with the naked eye can begin to cause UV-induced, sunburn-like lesions on the retina.

Viewing the Sun through light concentrating optical instruments such as binoculars is very hazardous without an appropriate filter which blocks UV and substantially dims the sunlight.. Unfiltered binoculars can deliver more than 500 times as much energy to the retina as using the naked eye, thus killing retinal cells almost instantly. Even brief glances at the midday Sun through unfiltered binoculars can cause permanent blindness. One way to view the Sun safely is to project its image onto a screen using a telescope and eyepiece without cemented elements. This should only be done with a small refracting telescope or binoculars with a clean eyepiece.

Partial solar eclipses are hazardous to view because the eye's pupil is not adapted to the unusually high visual contrast. The pupil dilates according to the total amount of light in the field of view, not by the brightest object in the field. During partial eclipses most sunlight is blocked by the Moon passing in front of the Sun, but the uncovered parts of the photosphere have the same surface brightness as during a normal day. In the overall gloom, the pupil expands from ~2 mm to ~6 mm, and each retinal cell exposed to the solar image receives about ten times more light than it would looking at the non-eclipsed Sun. This may damage or kill those cells, resulting in small permanent blind spots for the viewer.

During sunrise and sunset, sunlight is attenuated due to scattering from a particularly long passage through the Earth's atmosphere and the direct Sun is sometimes faint enough to be viewed comfortably with the naked eye or safely with the help of optical instruments. Hazy conditions, atmospheric dust, and high humidity contribute to this atmospheric attenuation.

Attenuating filters to view the Sun should be specifically designed for that use. Some improvised filters pass UV or IR rays that may harm the eye at high brightness levels. Filters on telescopes or binoculars should be on the objective lens and never on the eyepiece, because eyepiece filters can suddenly crack or shatter due to high heat loads from the absorbed sunlight.

Solar Deity or the Sun God, is a deity who represents the sun. People have worshiped these for all of recorded history. Hence, many beliefs have formed around this worship, such as the "missing sun" found in many cultures. Sun worship is a possible origin of henotheism and ultimately monotheism. Among the earliest records of human beliefs, the early Egyptian goddesses carried a sun above their head which was a symbol of dignity. The sun was a major aspect of Egyptian symbols and hieroglyphs. The cobra, the lioness, the cow, the dominant symbols of the most ancient Egyptian deities, carried their relationship to the sun atop their heads. They were female and their cults remained active throughout the history of the Egyptian culture. Later a sun god was established in the eighteenth dynasty on top of the other solar deities. S l is the goddess after whom the Sun and Sunday are named in English.

As a part of the Hindu religion, numerous Vedas in Sanskrit are dedicated to Surya or the Sun God. The famous Gayatri mantra, which is regarded as one of the most sacred of the Hindu hymns is also dedicated to the Sun. The ritual of sandhyavandanam, performed by some Hindus, is an elaborate set of hand gestures and body movements, designed to greet and revere the Sun.The Sun God in Hinduism is an ancient deity, worthy of immense worship. The Sun is referred to in Sanskrit as "Mitra" or "Friend" down to the invariable warmth, life-giving nature and optimism its light brings to mankind. Sun is also referred as "Prati-Aksh Devta" meaning "The visible Divinity" and worthy of worship and reverence. he charioteer of Surya is Arun, who is also personified as the redness that accompanies the sunlight in dawn and dusk.

The Mahabharata describes the warrior hero Karna as the son of the righteous queen Kunti and the Sun. Rama, the protagonist of Ramayana is supposed to be a descendant of Surya Vansh or the clan of kings as bright as the Sun.

In India, at Konark, a town in Orissa, a temple is dedicated to Surya. The Konark temple has also been declared a UNESCO world heritage site. Surya or Sun God is also considered as the most prominent of the navagrahas or nine celestial objects of the Hindus. Navagrahas can be found in almost all Hindu temples.

According to the Chinese mythology, there were originally ten suns in the sky, and the world was so hot that nothing could grow. A hero called Hou Yi shot down nine of them with a bow and arrow. In another Chinese myth, the solar eclipse was caused by the dog of heaven biting off a piece of the sun. This belief resulted in a tradition in China to hit pots and pans during a solar eclipse to drive away the "dog".

One of the first people to offer scientific explanation for the Sun was a Greek philosopher named Anaxagoras, who reasoned that the Sun was a giant flaming ball of metal even larger than the Peloponnesus, and not thechariot of Helios. For teaching this heresy, he was imprisoned by the authorities and sentenced to death but he was later released through the intervention of Pericles. Eratosthenes might have been the first person to have accurately calculated the distance between the Earth and the Sun as 149 million kilometers and it is roughly the same as the modern accepted figure.

The theory that the Sun is the center around which the planets move was proposed by the ancient Greek Aristarchus and Indians. In the early 17th century, the invention of the telescope permitted detailed observations of sunspots by Thomas Harriot, Galileo Galilei and other astronomers. Isaac Newton observed the Sun's light after passing it through a prism, and showed that it was made up of light of many colors. Herschel discovered infrared radiations beyond the red part of the solar spectrum. During the early years of modern scientific era, the source of the Sun's energy was still a significant puzzle. Lord Kelvin suggested that the Sun was a gradually cooling liquid body which was radiating an internal store of heat.Unfortunately the resulting estimate of the Sun's age was only 20 million years, well short of the time span of at least 300 million years suggested by some geological discoveries of that time.

In 1904 Ernest Rutherford suggested that the Sun's output could be maintained by an internal source of heat, and he suggested radioactive decay as the source. However it was Albert Einstein who provided the essential clue to the source of the Sun's energy output with his mass-energy equivalence relation E = mc2.

In 1920 Sir Arthur Eddington suggested that the pressures and temperatures at the core of the Sun could produce a nuclear fusion reaction that merged hydrogen into helium nuclei, resulting in a production of energy from the net change in mass.

Finally, a seminal paper was published in 1957 by Margaret Burbidge which was entitled "Synthesis of the Elements in Stars". The paper demonstrated convincingly that most of the elements in the universe had been synthesized by nuclear reactions inside stars, some like our Sun. This revelation stands today as one of the great achievements of science.


