BART Transfer- San Francisco Airport

BART leaves from inside the SFO International Terminal and travels to downtown San Francisco in 30 minutes and the train stops at 4 downtown stations that are close to the Civic Center, Union Square, Moscone and Financial District hotels. Fisherman's Wharf hotels are a very short taxi ride away from the Embarcadero station. This is the last station before the train goes under the San Francisco Bay to the East Bay and to cities like Berkely, Oakland, and beyond.

Your BART ticket is good throughout your stay in San Francisco as long as there is value remaining but this is not a multiple day ticket. The ticket must have a minimum of $5.35 remaining for return to SFO or additional fare will be required upon arrival at SFO. BART service is distance based and this ticket provides rides to and from SFO and other destinations and the appropriate fare for the distance traveled is automatically subtracted from the ticket when leaving a station.

SFO to San Francisco Transfer: Round trip transfer from SFO to 4 downtown locations. It has enough fare for 2 additional BART rides within San Francisco.

SFO to East Bay: Round trip transfer from SFO to downtown locations and East Bay cities. It has enough fare to visit Walnut Creek (only) or Berkeley and Oakland or additional BART rides within San Francisco.

Economy San Francisco Bay Area Ticket: The airport transfer is not included but it provides access to San Francisco neighborhoods, museums, sight seeing in the city and/or Easy Bay cities such as Berkeley , Oakland or Walnut Creek.

Premium San Francisco Bay Area Ticket: The airport transfer is not included but it provides access to several Bay Area cities for shopping and sightseeing. This includes more fare than the Economy Ticket Schedule:


San Francisco Airport BART Train Departure Point:

Departs from San Francisco International Airport and downtown San Francisco three to four times an hour daily . Your voucher can only be redeemed at San Francisco International Airport.

Downtown Stations: SFO to San Francisco Transfer, Economy or Premium Tickets Civic Center - lower Market St. hotels Powell Street - Union Square, Moscone West
Montgomery Street - Financial District, Moscone North and South
Embarcadero - Financial District, taxis to Fisherman's Wharf

Popular San Francisco Stations for Tourists: SFO to San Francisco Transfer, Economy or Premium Tickets 16th Street Mission - Dining / Nightlife 24th Street Mission - Dining / Nightlife

Popular East Bay Stations for Tourists: SFO to East Bay Transfer, Economy or Premium Tickets Downtown Berkeley - Theater / Dining / UC Berkeley 12th St. Oakland City Center - Dining / Jack London Square
Rockbridge (Oakland) - Shopping / Dining Walnut Creek - Shopping / Dining Hotel Pickup:

Hotel pickup and drop off is not available Additional information

San Francisco Airport BART Transfer
Inclusions: Round trip SFO transfers to downtown San Francisco or the East Bay
Additional round trip to any SF location Additional information This pass must be booked at least 24 hours in advance of travel Confirmation of this pass will be received at time of booking Booking Details: This pass must be booked at least 24 hours in advance of travel Confirmation of this pass will be received at time of booking

Glen Park
The Glen Park neighborhood in San Francisco is nestled in a small valley below Diamond Heights, and BART is at the center of the neighborhood on the corner of Diamond and Bosworth Streets.
Lines Serving this Station Pittsburg/Bay Point : SFO Fremont : Daly City Richmond : Daly City/Millbrae Dublin/Pleasanton : Daly City/Millbrae
Parking
This station has Midday parking beginning at 9 a.m. with a five-hour limit (free).
Bikes
Bike Racks: Yes Bike racks are available at most BART stations. Bike Station: None FREE secure bike parking is available at several BART stations.
Connecting Transit Route s
Glen Park Station is served by San Francisco Muni routes 23 Monterey, 26 Valencia, 44 O'Shaughnessy and 52 Excelsior, J Church.

