Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 are twin spacecrafts which were launched by NASA in separate months during the year 1977 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. As originally designed, these spacecrafts were to conduct closeup studies of planets like Jupiter and Saturn, Saturn's rings and also the larger moons of the two planets In order to accomplish their mission of two planets, the two spacecrafts were originally built to last for five years but as the mission continued with successful achievement of all the objectives, the additional flybys of the next two outermost giant planets, that is Uranus and Neptune, also proved to be possible. As a matter of fact this was irresistible to mission engineers and scientists at the Voyagers' home in Pasadena, California.
V oyager spacecrafts were designed to withstand any harsh conditions which include high levels of radiation that they might encounter in deep space. Keeping this in mind most of the 65,000 different components were radiation hardened. Those compontnts that were more sensitive were shielded in order to withstand the radiation. As the two spacecrafts were going to travel far away from the Sun, this mission was totally different from the other exploratory missions. Solar panels could not be used to power and direct the spacecraft. The scientists devised a series of 16 thrusters which allowed delicate maneuvers in the probes' trajectory. Voyager 1 and 2 would be dependent mostly on the gravitational force of the planets they it would visit. This force would be used to propel it toward its next destination. In order to power the scientific equipment used on board, Voyager makes use of radioisotope thermoelectric generators. These generators convert the heat given off as a result of natural radioactive decay of plutonium dioxide into electricity. Thus it acts much like a mini nuclear generator. The spacecrafts have got the ability to perform ten different scientific experiments. To conduct these experiments, the crafts include infrared and ultraviolet sensors, television cameras, magnetometers, plasma detectors along with cosmic-ray and charged-particle sensors. For gathering information about planetary atmospheres and the ring systems, the scientists have used radios mounted on the probe. The spacecraft is capable of sending data back to Earth and receiving its controlling commands from the Earth by using a global spacecraft-tracking system called the Deep Space Network.

As the spacecrafts flew across the solar system, with the help of remote-control reprogramming, the Voyagers were endowed with greater capabilities than they originally possessed at the time of leaving the Earth. As a result, the two-planet mission became four-planet mission and the five-year lifetimes were stretched to twelve and then to more than thirty years.

Eventually, Voyager 1 and 2 would explore the giant outer planets of the solar system, 48 moons of these planets and the unique systems of rings as well as magnetic fields that these planets possess. Had the mission ended after the Jupiter and Saturn flybys, it still would have surely provided enough material to rewrite the astronomy textbooks but having doubled their itineraries, the Voyagers have returned information to Earth over the years and this has has revolutionized the planetary astronomy, thus helping to resolve key questions while raising intriguing new ones at the same time about the origin and evolution of the planets.

The original Voyager mission to Jupiter and Saturn successfully brought Voyager 1 to Jupiter on March 5, 1979, to Saturn on November 12, 1980. This was followed by Voyager 2 to Jupiter on July 9, 1979, and to Saturn on August 25, 1981. Voyager 1

The Voyager 1 is a 722-kilogram robotic space probe of the outer Solar System which was launched on September 5, 1977. It remains operational till date, currently pursuing its extended mission. As a part of its mission, it has to locate and study the boundaries of our Solar System, including the Kuiper belt and also beyond. As already mentioned, Its original mission was to visit the planets Jupiter and Saturn and it was the first probe that provided detailed images of the moons of these two planets.

Voyager 1 is the farthest human made object sent from Earth. It is traveling away from the Earth and the Sun at the same time at a faster relative speed as compared to any other probe. Though its twin space-probe, called Voyager 2, was launched 16 days before the launch of Voyager 1 but Voyager 2 will never be able to pass Voyager 1. In the same manner, the New Horizons mission to Pluto will never be able to pass Voyager 1 despite being launched from Earth at much faster speed as compared to both Voyager crafts, because of the fact that during its flight, Voyager 1 had benefited from a number of gravity assisted speed boosts. At present, the speed of New Horizons is greater than Voyager 1 but when it reaches the same distance from the sun as Voyager is at present, its speed will be about 13 km/s as compared to Voyager's present speed of 17 km/s. Mission Profile of Voyager 1

Voyager 1 was launched on September 5, 1977, by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration from Cape Canaveral aboard a TitanIIIE-Centaur rocket, which was a few days after after its twin space probe, Voyager 2 on August 20, 1977 was launched. Despite being launched after its twin space probe, Voyager 2 , Voyager 1 had been sent on a faster trajectory and so it reached Jupiter and Saturn before its twin space probe could.

On September 26, 2008, Voyager 1 was at a distance of about 107.58 AU or 16.093 billion km from the Sun, and it had entered the heliosheath, which is the termination shock region between solar system and the interstellar space. It's a vast area where Sun's influence gives way to other heavenly bodies in the galaxy. The current goal of Voyager 1 is to reach and study the heliopause, which is the boundary of our stellar system.

If Voyager 1 continues to function when it finally completes its passage through the heliopause, it will become the first human-made object that will be able to leave our star system. As a result, the scientists will be able to get their first direct measurements of prevailing conditions in the interstellar medium and this may further provide clues which may be relevant to the origin and the overall nature of the Universe. At this location, signals from Voyager 1 take more than 14 hours to reach its control center at in La Ca ada Flintridge, California. Voyager 1 is moving on a hyperbolic trajectory and it has achieved escape velocity which means that its orbit will never return to the inner solar system.

Though the primary targets of Voyager 1 were the planets Jupiter and Saturn along with their moons and rings; its current mission is to detect the heliopause and also the particle measurements of solar wind along with the interstellar medium. Both the Voyager probes have outlasted their originally-planned mission. Each probe gets electrical power from three radioisotope thermoelectric generators and these are expected to continue generating enough electric power to allow the probes to keep communicating with Earth at least until 2025.

Voyager 2

The Voyager 2 is an unmanned interplanetary space probe that was launched on August 20, 1977. It is identical in form as compared to to its sister craft, called Voyager 1. Voyager 2 has been made to follow a slower trajectory which allowed it to be kept in the ecliptic that is, the plane of the Solar System, so that the spacecraft could be sent to Uranus and Neptune bu making use of gravity assist during its 1981 encounter at Saturn. Due to this trajectory, Voyager 2 was not able see the moon Titan as close as this moon was seen by Voyager 1. This probe became the first and the only spacecraft that could travel to Uranus and Neptune. Thus it completed the Planetary Grand Tour, which was a rare geometric arrangement of the outer planets and it only occurs once after every 176 years.

Voyager 2 has been the most productive space probe for visiting four planets along with their moons. This includes primary visits to two previously unexplored planets, with the help of powerful cameras and a number of of scientific instruments. All this has been achieved at a fraction of the money that was later spent on specialized probes like the Cassini-Huygens probe and the Galileo spacecraft.

Mission Profile of Voyager 2

As already mentioned, Voyager 2 had been launched on August 20, 1977, from Cape Canaveral, Florida. Ground crews became so engrossed in the launch problem of Voyager 1 that they forgot to send a very important activation code to Voyager 2. This negligence caused the probe to shut down the main radio receiver but fortunately, the ground crews were successful in establishing a contact through this spacecraft's back-up radio receiver. As a result of this, a fuse blew off in the power supply of its primary receiver, and thus permanently disabling it. Since then, the backup receiver had to be relied upon for the entire mission of Voyager 2. Flyby of Jupiter

The picture shows "The Great Red Spot" as seen from Voyager 1 .

The picture shows Io - Jupiter's innermost Galilean satellite.

Voyager 1 began photographing the planet Jupiter in January 1979. Its closest approach to Jupiter was on March 5, 1979, which was at a distance of 349,000 kilometers from its center. As greater resolution was allowed by its close approach, most of the observations of the moons, magnetic fields, rings and radiation environment of Jupiter were made during the 48-hour period that bracketed closest approach. . .The most surprising was the existence of volcanic activity on Io, which could not be observed from the Earth or by Pioneer 10 or 11. The two Voyager spacecrafts helped in making a number of important discoveries about Jupiter and its moons. The most surprising discovery was the existence of volcanic activity on Io, which was not observed from the ground or by Pioneer 10 or 11. Jupiter's great red spot was found to be made up of complex swirling storms. It was found that below the atmosphere of Jupiter lies turbulent smaller storms and eddies present throughout the banded clouds of this planet. A diffuse cloud of dusty material formed a ring around the planet and this ring had been previously undetected. After studying Jupiter, the Voyager probes went further to study the previously uncharted moons of this planet. As a result, they found the first active volcanoes of the solar system that were not on a planet and as a matter of fact, there were actually nine active volcanoes on Jupiter's moon called Io.

Flyby of Saturn

The picture shows the layers of haze covering Saturn's satellite, Titan.

Picture taken by Voyager 1 of Saturn's F ring

The gravity assist at Jupiter was a great success and as a result, Voyager 1 went on to visit Saturn. Voyager 1's Saturn flyby occurred during November 1980. Its closest approach was on November 12, 1980 when it came within a distance of 124,000 kilometres of the planet's cloud tops.

Saturn is the second largest planet of our solar system and this planet takes 29.5 Earth years to complete its orbit around the Sun. Its day was clocked at 10 hours and 39 minutes. Saturn has at least 17 moons along a complex ring system. Just like Jupiter, Saturn is made up of mostly hydrogen and helium. The hazy yellow hue of Saturn was found to be marked by broad atmospheric banding that was similar to but fainter than that on Jupiter. A closer scrutiny with the help of Voyager's imaging systems showed long-lived ovals and some other atmospheric features which were generally smaller than those on Jupiter.

On of the greatest surprises was found by the Voyagers in rings of Saturn. It is now believed that the rings have been formed from larger moons which were shattered by impacts of meteoroids and comets. The resulting dust and boulder- to house-sized particles have gathered in the form of a broad plane around the planet.

The most interesting discoveries were some features found on the different moons of Saturn . One such feature was a crater on the moon Mimas. Th crater is so large in size that the impact that might have caused it, must have almost caused this moon to break apart. The larger Saturnian moon called Enceladus had some huge and unexpected faults and valleys.

The irregular shapes of eight smaller moons of Saturn indicates that these moons are fragments of other larger bodies. Unexpected structures like kinks and spokes were also found apart from thin rings and broad, diffused rings. These structures were not observed from Earth. Most of the elaborate structure of some rings is because of the gravitational effects of the nearby satellites. This phenomenon is demonstrated by the relation between the F-ring and two small moons which "shepherd" the ring material. As there is variation in the separation of the moons from the ring, this may be the cause of the ring's kinked appearance.

Due to the earlier discovery of thick atmosphere on Titan, the Voyager controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory opted for Voyager 1 to make a very close approach of Titan and terminate its Grand Tour. The Titan-approach trajectory had caused an additional gravitional deflection which took Voyager 1 out of the ecliptic plane, thus ending the planetary science mission of Voyager 1. Voyager 1 could have also been given an altered trajectory, as apart of which, slingshot effect of Saturn's gravity would have helped in propelling the spacecraft to a rendezvous with Pluto, but at that time this option was not exercised, because a different trajectory would have prohibited the close fly-by of Titan.

Uranus as viewed from 18 million kilometers.

Final Image of Uranus

Miranda (the moon of Uranus)

Uranus is the third largest planet of our solar system and it orbits around the Sun at a distance of approximately 2.8 billion kilometers and completes its orbit around the sun in every 84 years. The duration of a day on Uranus has been measured as 17 hours, 14 minutes by Voyager 2.

Voyager 2 has helped in finding that one of the most striking influence of Uranus' sideways position is the effect on the tail of its magnetic field, which is tilted 60 degrees as compared to the planet's axis of rotation. The presence of the magnetic field of Uranus was not known until the arrival of Voyager 2.

Radiation belts at Uranus have been found to be of an intensity that is similar to those found at Saturn. The intensity of radiation within these belts is such that the irradiation would quickly darken any methane that was trapped in the icy surfaces of its inner moons and ring particles within a span of 100,000 years. This might have resulted in the darkened surfaces on the moons and ring particles, which have been found to be almost uniformly gray in color.

The Uranus flyby of Voyager 2 has revealed a strong magnetic field and also a high layer of haze over this planet's sunlit pole. It was found to radiate large amount of ultraviolet light, a phenomenon that has been dubbed as "day-glow." The average temperature has been found to be about 60 kelvins. It's quite surprising that most of the planet along with the illuminated and dark poles show nearly the same temperature at the cloud tops.

The greatest surprise that awaited was when Voyager 2 visited Uranus was the presence of ten moons that had never ever been seen before from the Earth. Miranda, t he inner most of the planet's largest moons, showed indications of great geological activity. As a matter of fact, Miranda was revealed as one of the strangest bodies seen in the solar system. This included fault canyons that were as deep as 20 km or 12 miles, terraced layers, along with a mixture of old and new surfaces . One theory holds that Miranda might have been be a re-aggregation of material from some earlier time when the moon might have been fractured by a violent impact.

The nine rings which surround Uranus were found to be made up of much larger particles and these were distinctly younger as compared to the rings found surrounding Jupiter and Saturn. Particles making up the rings might have been be remnants of a moon that might have been torn up by gravitational effects or it might have been broken by a high-velocity impact.

Image of Neptune

Image of Triton

The closest approach of Voyager 2 to Neptune occurred on August 25, 1989. Since Neptune was the last major planet that could be visited by Voyager 2, it was decided to make a close flyby of the moon Triton, irrespective of the consequences to its trajectory.

The probe discovered the Great Dark Spot, which has disappeared since then, according to Hubble Space Telescope observations. It was originally thought to be a very large cloud by itself but it was later postulated as a hole in its visible cloud deck. Neptune was found to be quite dynamic and it was found to contain several large dark spots. Strong winds up to a speed of 2000 km/h or 1240 mph, which are faster as compared to any other planet are found to circulate below the atmosphere of this planet. Triton, which is the largest of Neptune's moons, has been found to have geyser like eruptions spewing nitrogen gas along with dust particles far into its atmosphere.

For a number of years, beginning in the late 19th century, it had been widely believed that there was an unseen planet which was influencing Uranus and Neptune, due to the fact that their observed and predicted positions had differed. This belief helped in bringing about the discovery of Pluto in 1930 but Pluto does not have enough mass to account for these discrepancies. When Voyager 2 passed Neptune, it became possible to precisely measure Neptune's mas and this planet turned out to be turned out to be 0.5% less massive as compared to the previous belief, a difference that was comparable to the mass of the entire Mars. When the orbits of Uranus and Neptune were recalculated, the erroneous mass figure became clear. It was obviously not the gravity of any unseen planet. These orbital discrepancies had long vexed the astronomical community.

With the International Astronomical Union's 2006 decision to reclassify Pluto as a "dwarf planet", the 1989 flyby of the planet Neptune by Voyager 2 became the instant when every planet in our solar system had been visited at least once by a spacecraft.

It has been estimated that both the Voyager space crafts have sufficient electrical power required for operating their radio transmitters until 2025, which will be more than 48 years after their launch. Voyager 1 is the most distant functioning space probe that receives commands and transmits information to Earth. As Voyager 1 is heading for interstellar space, its instruments continue to study the solar system. Some scientists believe that Voyager 1 has entered the termination shock in February 2003 while some other scientists have expressed a doubt. However, in May 2005 a press release from NASA said that consensus was that Voyager 1 is now in the heliosheath. The scientists believe the space craft will reach the heliopause in the year 2015. Voyager 2 Proves That The Solar System Is Squashed

Voyager 2 entered the region, called heliosheath, on August 30, 2007. As Voyager 2 crossed the boundary of heliosheath, called solar wind termination shock, at a distance of about 10 billion miles away from Voyager 1 and about a billion miles closer to the sun, it has confirmed that the solar system is "squashed" or "dented". In other words, the bubble carved into interstellar space due to the solar wind is not perfectly round as it was thought earlier. Where Voyager 2 crossed the boundary, the bubble has been pushed in closer to the sun due to the local interstellar magnetic field.

Voyager 2 continues its journey and it has entered the outermost layer of the vast heliospheric bubble that surrounds the Sun. It has joined Voyager 1 in its last leg of the race to interstellar space.

The solar wind is very thin gas of electrically charged particles which are blown into space by the sun. The solar wind blows in different directions, thus carving a bubble into the interstellar space and it extends past the orbit of Pluto. The bubble is known as heliosphere. Voyager 1 was the first spacecraft to explore the outer layer on crossing into the heliosheath in December 2004. As Voyager 1 made the historic passage, it encountered the shock wave which surrounds our solar system known as the solar windtermination shock. At this point, the solar wind is abruptly slowed due to pressure from gas and magnetic field in interstellar region.

Even if Voyager 2 is the second spacecraft that will cross the shock, it is scientifically exciting for a number of reasons. Voyager 2 spacecraft has got a working Plasma Science instrument which can directly measure the temperature, velocity and density of the solar wind. On Voyager 1, this instrument is no longer working and because of this reason, estimates of the solar wind speed were made indirectly. Secondly, Voyager 1 might have had only one shock crossing and it had happened during a data gap but Voyager 2 had more than five shock crossings over a couple of days and three of them are clearly found in the data. They show an unusual shock.

Pioneers 10 and 11 that preceded Voyager1 and Voyager 2, both carried small metal plates identifying their place and time of origin. These were meant for the benefit of any space-farers who might find them in future. Following this example, NASA placed a message aboard Voyager 1 and Voyager 2. It was a much more ambitious message than before. The contents of these record were selected by a committee chaired by Carl Sagan of Cornell University. He and his associates assembled 115 images along-with a variety of natural sounds, like those made by wind, surf, thunder, whales, birds and other animals. They also added musical selections from various cultures, spoken greetings from people of Earth in fifty-five different language and also printed messages by President Carter and U.N. Secretary General Waldheim.Both the records have been encased in a protective jacket made of aluminum along with a cartridge and a needle. Instructions given in symbolic language have been use to explain the origin of the spacecraft and these instruction also indicate how the record is to be played.On hundred and fifteen images images have been encoded in analog form and the remaining part of the record is in the form of an audio that has been designed to be played at a speed of 16-2/3 rpm.

Once the Voyager spacecrafts would have left the solar system they will be in vast empty space. After forty thousand years, they will make an approach to any other planetary system. As pointed out by Carl Sagan, the spacecraft might be encountered and the record might played only if there are advanced civilizations in interstellar space. Frequently Asked Questions:

Q1. Why didn't the two Voyagers fly by Pluto?

Ans 1. Both Voyagers flew beyond the orbit of Neptune/Pluto in 1989, but none of them flew by Pluto. In fact Pluto was elsewhere in its orbit at that time and it was never planned that the two Voyagers would visit Pluto.

Exploration of Jupiter and Saturn was the original mission of Voyager. Two spacecrafts had been sent on different paths, first to the planet Jupiter and then, with the help of gravity assists, on to the planet Saturn. The Voyager 1 could have been aimed to Pluto, but the exploration of the rings of Saturn and was a primary scientific objective. This resulted in the trajectory being diverted upward out of the ecliptic plane so that no further planetary encounters could be possible for Voyager 1. Once Voyager 1 was able to successfully gather data at Titan, the Voyager 2 was allowed to go to Uranus and Neptune.Voyager 2, could have been aimed towards Pluto, but in such a case, the aim point would have been inside Neptune which was not very practical.

Q2. I'm writing a paper about the Golden Records which are aboard the Voyager spacecraft and I was curious about the committee with Dr. Carl Sagan and also if they were American or foreign scientists.

Ans 2. Frank Drake, Ann Druyan, Timothy Ferris, Jon Lomberg and Linda Salzman Sagan were a part of the committee along with Carl Sagan. Apart from these, Sagan had also organized a small group of scientific consultants who provided advice on the message contents. All of them worked in the U.S., but their citizenship had not described in the book, Murmurs of Earth. Q3. Where do we consider the solar system to end. Is it at Pluto's orbit or solar apex?

Ans 3. The solar system can be broadly considered as consisting of all those objects which are governed by the gravitational field of the Sun. Apart from planets, moons, asteroids and dust in the planetary system, it also includes the distant bodies in the Kuiper Belt and Oort cloud. The Sun's gravitational influence may extend as far as 2 light years.

Q4. Where are the spacecrafts Voyager 1 and 2 today? Are they far from our Solar System and free from the Sun's gravitational field?

Ans 4. At present Voyager 1 is furthest away from the sun but it is still within the region that is dominated by the Sun and its solar wind. So it is still considered to be within the solar system. Both spacecrafts have passed the farthest known planets of our solar system.

Q5. Have any man made objects exited the solar system?

Ans 5. The two Voyagers and also the Pioneers 10 and 11 have gone beyond the planets in our solar system and they are heading towards interstellar space. All four of them are still in the region that is dominated by our sun and, so they have not left our solar system. Voyager 1 is the furthest human-made object from the Earth and the Sun.


