The most common blunderwhen the topic of a computer virus arises is that people will oftenrefer to a worm or Trojan Horse as a virus. Although the wordsTrojan, worm, and virus are used interchangeably, they are not thesame. Viruses, worms, and Trojan Horses are all malicious programsthat can cause damage to your computer, but there are differencesbetween the three, and knowing those differences can help you tobetter protect your computer from their often-damagingeffects.



Many worms that have beencreated are only designed to spread, and don't attempt to alter thesystems they pass through. However, as the Morris worm and Mydoomshowed, the network traffic and other unintended effects can oftencause major disruption. A "payload" is code designed to do morethan spread the worm - it might delete files on a host system(e.g., the ExploreZip worm), encrypt files in a cryptoviralextortion attack, or send documents via e-mail. A very commonpayload for worms is to install a backdoor in the infected computerto allow the creation of a "zombie" under control of the wormauthor - Sobig and Mydoom are examples which created zombies.Networks of such machines are often referred to as botnets and arevery commonly used by spam senders for sending junk email or tocloak their website's address. Spammers are therefore thought to bea source of funding for the creation of such worms, and wormwriters have been caught selling lists of IP addresses of infectedmachines. Others try to blackmail companies with threatened DoSattacks.

A computer worm is aself-replicating computer program. It uses a network to send copiesof itself to other nodes (computers on the network) and it may doso without any user intervention. Unlike a virus, it does not needto attach itself to an existing program. Worms almost always causeat least some harm to the network, if only by consuming bandwidth,whereas viruses almost always corrupt or modify files on a targetedcomputer.

A worm is similar to a virus by itsdesign, and is considered to be a sub-class of a virus. Wormsspread from computer to computer, but unlike a virus, they have theability to travel without any help from a person. They takeadvantage of file or information transport features on your system,which allow it to travel unaided.

The biggest danger with a worm is its ability toreplicate itself on your system, so rather than your computersending a single worm back out into the wild, it could actuallysend out hundreds or thousands of copies of itself, creating ahuge, devastating effect. One example would be for a worm to send acopy of itself to everyone listed in your e-mail address book. Theworm copies would then replicate and send themselves out toeveryone listed in each of the receivers' address books - and sothe manifest continues on down the line.

Due to the copying nature of a worm and its abilityto travel across networks, the end result in most cases is that theworm consumes too much system memory (or network bandwidth),causing Web servers, network servers, and individual computers tostop responding. In more recent attacks - such as the much talkedabout Blaster Worm - the worm has been designed to tunnel into yoursystem and allow malicious users to control your computerremotely.

How Do IRemove Conficker Worm Files?

Need help figuring out how to delete files, DLLs, and registrykeys? While there's some risk involved, and you should onlymanually remove Conficker Worm files if you're comfortable andconfident editing your system, you'll find it's fairly easy todelete Conficker Worm files in Windows. How to delete Conficker Worm files in Windows XPand Vista: Click your Windows Start menu, and from "Search," click "ForFiles and Folders…" A speech bubble will pop up asking you, "What do you want tosearch for?" Click "All files and folders." Type any file name in the search box, and select "Local HardDrives." Click "Search." Once the file is found, delete it. How to stop Conficker Worm processes: Click the Start menu, select Run. Type taskmgr.exe into the the Run command box, and click "OK."You can also launch the Task Manager by pressing keys ALT + CTRL +DELETE or CTRL + Shift + ESC. Click Processes tab, and find Conficker Worm processes. Once you've found the Conficker Worm processes, right-clickthem and select "End Process" to kill Conficker Worm. How to remove Conficker Worm registry keys:

Your Windows registry is the core of your Windowsoperating system, storing information about user settings, systempreferences, and software, including which applicationsautomatically launch at start up. Because of this, spyware,malware, and adware will often bury their own files into yourWindows registry so that they automatically launch every time yourstart up your PC.

Because your registry is such a key piece of yourWindows system, you should always backup your registry before youmake any changes to it. Editing your registry can be intimidatingif you're not a computer expert, and when you change or a delete acritical registry key or registry value, there's a chance you mayneed to reinstall your entire Windows operating system. Make sureyour backup your registry before editing it. Select your Windows menu "Start," and click "Run." An "Open"field will appear. Type "regedit" and click "OK" to open up yourRegistry Editor. Registry Editor will open as a window with two panes. The leftside Registry Editor's window lets you select various registrykeys, and the right side displays the registry values of theregistry key you select. To find a registry key, such as any Conficker Worm registrykeys, select "Edit," then select "Find," and in the search bar typeany of Conficker Worm's registry keys. As soon as Conficker Worm registry key appears, you can deletethe Conficker Worm registry key by right-clicking it and selecting"Modify," then clicking "Delete." How to remove Conficker Worm DLL files:

Like most any software, spyware, adware, and malwaremay also use DLL files. DLL is short for "dynamically linkedlibrary," and Conficker Worm DLL files, like other DLLs, carryoutpredetermined tasks. To manually delete Conficker Worm DLL files,you'll use Regsver32, a Windows tool designed to help you removeDLL and other files. First you'll locate Conficker Worm DLL files you want todelete. Open your Windows Start menu, then click "Run." Type "cmd"in Run, and click "OK." To change your current directory, type "cd" in the command box,press your "Space" key, and enter the full directory where theConficker Worm DLL file is located. If you're not sure if theConficker Worm DLL file is located in a particular directory, enter"dir" in the command box to display a directory's contents. To goone directory back, enter "cd .." in the command box and press"Enter." When you've located the Conficker Worm DLL file you want toremove, type "regsvr32 /u SampleDLLName.dll" (e.g., "regsvr32 /ujl27script.dll") and press your "Enter" key.

That's it. If you want to restore Conficker Worm DLLfile you removed, enter "regsvr32 DLLJustDeleted.dll" (e.g.,"regsvr32 jl27script.dll") into your command box, and press your"Enter" key.

A computer virus attachesitself to a program or file so it can spread from one computer toanother, leaving infections as it travels. Much like human viruses,computer viruses can range in severity; some viruses cause onlymildly annoying effects while others can damage your hardware,software applications, or files.

Almost all viruses are attached to an executablefile, which means the virus may exist on your computer but can'tinfect your computer unless you run - or open - the maliciousprogram. It's important to note that a virus can't be spreadwithout a human action (such as running an infected program) tokeep it going. People continue the spread of a computer virus,mostly unknowingly, by sharing infecting files or sending e-mailswith viruses as attachments in the e-mail.

SPYWARE

Spyware is computer software that is installed surreptitiously on a personalcomputer to intercept or take partial control over the user'sinteraction with the computer, without the user's informedconsent.

While the term spyware suggests software thatsecretly monitors the user's behavior, the functions of spywareextend well beyond simple monitoring. Spyware programs can collectvarious types of personal information, such as Internet surfinghabits, sites that have been visited, but can also interfere withuser control of the computer in other ways, such as installingadditional software, and redirecting Web browser activity. Spywareis known to change computer settings, resulting in slow connectionspeeds, different home pages, and/or loss of Internet orfunctionality of other programs. In an attempt to increase theunderstanding of spyware, a more formal classification of itsincluded software types is captured under the term privacy-invasivesoftware.

In response to the emergence of spyware, a smallindustry has sprung up dealing in anti-spyware software. Running anti-spywaresoftware has become a widely recognized element of computersecurity best practices for Microsoft Windows desktop computers. Anumber of jurisdictions have passed anti-spyware laws, whichusually target any software that is surreptitiously installed tocontrol a user's computer. In some infections, the spyware is not evenevident. Users assume in those situations that the issues relate tohardware, Windows installation problems, or a virus. Some owners ofbadly infected systems resort to contacting technical supportexperts, or even buying a new computer because the existing system"has become too slow". Badly infected systems may require a cleanreinstallation of all their software in order to return to fullfunctionality.
Some other types of spyware use rootkit techniques to preventdetection, and thus removal. Targetsoft, for instance, modifies the"Winsock" Windows Sockets files. The deletion of thespyware-infected file "inetadpt.dll" will interrupt normalnetworking usage.


Spyware can also come bundled with sharewareor other downloadable software. The user downloads a program andinstalls it, and the installer additionally installs the spyware.Although the desirable software itself may do no harm, the bundledspyware does. In some cases, spyware authors have paid sharewareauthors to bundle spyware with their software. In other cases,spyware authors have repackaged desirable freeware with installersthat slipstream spyware.If a spyware program is not blocked andmanages to get itself installed, it may resist attempts toterminate or uninstall it. Some programs work in pairs: when ananti-spyware scanner (or the user) terminates one running process,the other one respawns the killed program. Likewise, some spywarewill detect attempts to remove registry keys and immediately addthem again. Usually, booting the infected computer in safe modeallows an anti-spyware program a better chance of removingpersistent spyware.
The installation of spyware frequently involvesInternet Explorer. Its popularity and history of security issueshave made it the most frequent target. Its deep integration withthe Windows environment and scriptability make it an obvious pointof attack into Windows. Internet Explorer also serves as a point ofattachment for spyware in the form of Browser Helper Objects, whichmodify the browser's behaviour to add toolbars or to redirecttraffic.



TROJANS


The digital Trojan Horse of today is as full oftrickery as the mythological Trojan Horse after which it was named.At first glance a Trojan appears to be useful software but willactually do damage once installed or run on your computer.

People on the receiving end of a Trojan are usuallytricked into opening them because they appear to be receivinglegitimate software or files from a legitimate source. When aTrojan activates on your computer, the results can vary. SomeTrojans are designed to be more annoying than malicious (likechanging your desktop, adding silly active desktop icons, etc.),while others can cause serious damage by deleting files anddestroying information on your system.

Trojans can also create a backdoor to your computerthat gives malicious users access to your system, possiblycompromising confidential or personal information. Unlike virusesand worms, Trojans do not reproduce by infecting other files nor dothey self-replicate.

BLENDEDTHREATS

Added into the mix, we also have what is called ablended threat. A blended threat is a more sophisticated attackthat bundles some of the worst aspects of viruses, worms, Trojanhorses and malicious code into one single threat. Blended threatscan use server and Internet vulnerabilities to initiate, thentransmit and also spread an attack. Characteristics of blendedthreats are that they cause harm to the infected system or network,they propagates using multiple methods, the attack can come frommultiple points, and blended threats also exploitvulnerabilities.

To be considered a blended thread, the attack wouldnormally serve to transport multiple attacks in one payload. Forexample it wouldn't just launch a DoS attack - it would also, forexample, install a backdoor and maybe even damage a local system inone shot. Additionally, blended threats are designed to usemultiple modes of transport. So, while a worm may travel and spreadthrough e-mail, a single blended threat could use multiple routesincluding e-mail, IRC and file-sharing sharing networks.

Lastly, rather than a specific attack onpredetermined .exe files, a blended thread could do multiplemalicious acts, like modify your exe files, HTML files and registrykeys at the same time - basically it can cause damage withinseveral areas of your network at one time.

Blended threats are considered to be the worst riskto security since the inception of viruses, as most blended threatsalso require no human intervention to propagate.

COMBATING WORMS,VIRUSES, TROJAN HORSES


The first step to protecting your computer is toensure that your operating system (OS) is up-to-date. This isessential if you're running a Microsoft Windows OS.

Second, you should have anti-virus softwareinstalled on your system and should also ensure that your virusdefinitions are updated frequently to stay current on the latestfixes for new viruses, worms, and Trojans.

Additionally, make sure your anti-virus program canscan e-mail and files as your computer downloads them from theInternet. This helps prevent malicious programs from ever reachingyour computer.

If this isn't enough protection, then you may wantto consider installing a firewall as well. A firewall is a systemthat prevents unauthorized use of, and access to, your computer.Firewalls can be either hardware- or software-based.

Hardware firewalls provide a strong degree ofprotection from most forms of attack coming from the outside world.You can buy them as standalone products or as part of a broadbandrouter. Unfortunately, when battling viruses, worms, and Trojans, ahardware firewall may be less effective than a software firewall,as it could possibly ignore worms embedded in outgoing e-mail ?viewing the messages not as threats but rather as regular networktraffic.

For individual home users, a software-based firewallis the most popular option. A good software firewall will protectyour computer from outside attempts to control or gain access toyour computer, and will usually provide additional protectionagainst the most common Trojan programs or e-mail worms. Thedownside to a software firewall is that it only protects theindividual computer it's installed on, not on all networkedPCs.

It is important to remember that, on its own, afirewall is not going to rid you of your computer virus problems.However, when used in conjunction with regular operating systemupdates and a good anti-virus scanning software, it will add extrasecurity and protection for your computer or network.

ANTI-SPYWAREPROGRAMS


Many programmers and some commercial firmshave released products dedicated to remove or block spyware. SteveGibson's OptOut pioneered a growing category. Programs such asLavasoft's Ad-Aware SE (free scansfor non-commercial users, must pay for other features) and PatrickKolla's Spybot - Search & Destroy (all features free fornon-commercial use) rapidly gained popularity as effective tools toremove, and in some cases intercept, spyware programs. Morerecently, Microsoft acquired the GIANT AntiSpyware software,rebranding it as Windows AntiSpyware beta and releasing it as afree download for Genuine Windows XP and Windows 2003 users. In 2006, Microsoft renamedthe beta software to Windows Defender (free), and it was releasedas a free download in October 2006 and is included as standard withWindows Vista.

Major anti-virus firms such as Symantec,McAfee and Sophos have come later to the table, adding anti-spywarefeatures to their existing anti-virus products. Early on,anti-virus firms expressed reluctance to add anti-spywarefunctions, citing lawsuits brought by spyware authors against theauthors of web sites and programs which described their products as"spyware". However, recent versions of these major firms' home andbusiness anti-virus products do include anti-spyware functions,albeit treated differently from viruses. Symantec Anti-Virus, forinstance, categorizes spyware programs as "extended threats" andnow offers real-time protection from them (as it does forviruses).

Recently, the anti-virus company Grisoft , creator of AVG Anti-Virus , acquired anti-spyware firmEwido Networks, re-labeling their Ewido anti-spyware program as AVGAnti-Spyware Professional Edition. AVG also used this product toadd an integrated anti-spyware solution to some versions of the AVG Anti-Virus family of products,and a freeware AVG Anti-Spyware Free Edition available for privateand non-commercial use. This shows a trend by anti virus companiesto launch a dedicated solution to spyware and malware. Zone Labs,creator of Zone Alarm firewallhave also released an anti-spyware program.

Anti-spyware programs can combat spyware intwo ways: 1. They can provide real time protectionagainst the installation of spyware software on your computer. Thistype of spyware protection works the same way as that of anti-virusprotection in that the anti-spyware software scans all incomingnetwork data for spyware software and blocks any threats it comesacross. 2. Anti-spyware software programs can be usedsolely for detection and removal of spyware software that hasalready been installed onto your computer. This type of spywareprotection is normally much easier to use and more popular. Withthis spyware protection software you can schedule weekly, daily, ormonthly scans of your computer to detect and remove any spywaresoftware that has been installed on your computer. This type ofanti-spyware software scans the contents of the windows registry,operating system files, and installed programs on your computer andwill provide a list of any threats found, allowing you to choosewhat you want to delete and what you want to keep.

Real-time protection from spyware worksidentically to real-time anti-virus protection: the software scansdisk files at download time, and blocks the activity of componentsknown to represent spyware. In some cases, it may also interceptattempts to install start-up items or to modify browser settings.Because many spyware and adware are installed as a result ofbrowser exploits or user error, using security software (some ofwhich are antispyware, though many are not) to sandbox browsers canalso be effective to help restrict any damage done.

Earlier versions of anti-spyware programsfocused chiefly on detection and removal. Javacool Software'sSpywareBlaster, one of the first to offer real-time protection,blocked the installation of ActiveX-based and other spywareprograms.

Like most anti-virus software, manyanti-spyware/adware tools require a frequently-updated database ofthreats. As new spyware programs are released, anti-spywaredevelopers discover and evaluate them, making "signatures" or"definitions" which allow the software to detect and remove thespyware. As a result, anti-spyware software is of limitedusefulness without a regular source of updates. Some vendorsprovide a subscription-based update service, while others provideupdates free. Updates may be installed automatically on a scheduleor before doing a scan, or may be done manually.

Not all programs rely on updated definitions.Some programs rely partly (for instance many antispyware programssuch as Windows Defender, Spybot's TeaTimer and Spysweeper) orfully (programs falling under the class of HIPS such as BillP'sWinPatrol) on historical observation. They watch certainconfiguration parameters (such as certain portions of the Windowsregistry or browser configuration) and report any change to theuser, without judgment or recommendation. While they do not rely onupdated definitions, which may allow them to spot newer spyware,they can offer no guidance. The user is left to determine "what didI just do, and is this configuration changeappropriate?"

Windows Defender's SpyNet attempts toalleviate this through offering a community to share information,which helps guide both users, who can look at decisions made byothers, and analysts, who can spot fast-spreading spyware. Apopular generic spyware removal tool used by those with a certaindegree of expertise is HijackThis, which scans certain areas of theWindows OS where spyware often resides and presents a list withitems to delete manually. As most of the items are legitimatewindows files/registry entries it is advised for those who are lessknowledgeable on this subject to post a HijackThis log on thenumerous antispyware sites and let the experts decide what todelete.

A new breed of spyware (Look2Me spyware byNicTechNetworks is a good example) hides inside system-criticalprocesses and start up even in safe mode, see rootkit. With noprocess to terminate they are harder to detect and remove.Sometimes they do not even leave any on-disk signatures. Rootkittechnology is also seeing increasing use, as is the use of NTFSalternate data streams. Newer spyware programs also have specificcountermeasures against well known anti-malware products and mayprevent them from running or being installed, or even uninstallthem. An example of one that uses all three methods is Gromozon, anew breed of malware. It uses alternate data streams to hide. Arootkit hides it even from alternate data streams scanners andactively stops popular rootkit scanners from running.



Protecting againstdangerous computer worms

Worms spread by exploiting vulnerabilities inoperating systems. All vendors supply regular security updates, andif these are installed to a machine then the majority of worms areunable to spread to it. If a vendor acknowledges a vulnerability,but has yet to release a security update to patch it, a zero dayexploit is possible. However, these are relatively rare.

Users need to be wary of opening unexpected email,and should not run attached files or programs, or visit web sitesthat are linked to such emails. However, as with the ILOVEYOU worm,and with the increased growth and efficiency of phishing attacks,it remains possible to trick the end-user into running a maliciouscode.

Anti-virus and anti-spyware software are helpful,but must be kept up-to-date with new pattern files at least everyfew days. The use of a firewall is also recommended.