The elbow is a "hinge" joint formed by the distal end of the humerus and the proximal ends of the radius and ulna bones. The elbow moves into flexion and extension. The trochlea and capitulum of the humerus articulate with the trochlear notch of the ulna and the radial head, respectively.


The elbow contains three separate articulations. The humeroulnar joint is a modified hinge joint that allows flexion and extension. The humeroradial joint is a combined hinge and pivot joint that permits flexion and extension as well as rotation of the head of the radius on the capitellum of the humerus. The proximal radioulnar joint facilitates rotation during supination and pronation.

The two condyles of the humerus (found at the distal end) form the articulating surfaces at the elbow joint. Above the condyles are the lateral and medial epicondyles. The lateral epicondyle is the origin for the forearm extensor muscles, which extend the wrist. The medial epicondyle is the attachment point for the forearm flexor muscles that flex the wrist.

A fibrous capsule surrounds and encloses the elbow joint, and medial and lateral thickenings of the capsule create the joint's intrinsic, or "collateral," ligaments. The radial collateral ligament is on the lateral aspect of the joint, while the ulnar collateral ligament is on the medial side. The elbow is surrounded by a fibrous bag lined with synovial membrane supplying synovial fluid to the joint. There are also three fat pads which line the various holes (fossae) of the humerus - olecranon, coronoid and radial. A fibrous capsule surrounds and encloses the elbow joint, and medial and lateral thickenings of the capsule create the joint's intrinsic, or "collateral," ligaments. The radial collateral ligament is on the lateral aspect of the joint, while the ulnar collateral ligament is on the medial side.

The hinge-like articulation of both bones and ulnar and collateral ligaments makes the adult elbow stable. Lesser stability in children's elbow is to be expected due to the late fusion of the epiphyses of the ends of the bones. Primary muscles responsible for elbow flexion are biceps, brachialis and brachioradialis. Triceps, on the other hand, is the prime mover towards extension. In addition, anconeus and brachioradialis work in synergy with the triceps for this motion.

Secondary elbow flexors are the extensors carpi radialis longus, pronator teres and flexor carpi radialis.

The elbow also has a complex nerve innervation. The median nerve crosses the elbow medially and passes through the two heads of the pronator teres, a potential site of entrapment. The ulnar nerve passes along the medial arm and posterior to the medial epicondyle through the cubital tunnel, a likely site of compression. The radial nerve descends the arm laterally. It divides into the superficial (sensory) branch and the deep (motor, or posterior interosseous) branch. The deep branch must then pass through the arcade of Frohse, a fibrous arch formed by the proximal margin of the superficial head of the supinator muscle, where it is most susceptible to injury.

Three important nerves traverse through the forearm, namely, the median, ulnar and radial nerves.

Identifying Pain


When a patient presents with elbow pain, the physician should seek information about both occupational and recreational activities involving a repetitive load that could initiate a cycle of microtrauma, chronic inflammation, tissue degeneration, necrosis and, ultimately, tendon rupture.

The timing of the onset of symptoms can be helpful in identify the offending activity and thus the tissues at risk for overuse. The severity of symptoms can be judged by whether they occur only after activity, with activity or at rest. It is important to determine the location of the pain and whether the pain is radiating in character. Alleviating or aggravating factors should also be identified.

It is important to determine whether the symptoms are neurologic or mechanical. Neurologic symptoms include paresthesia or weakness. Clicking upon movement, catching during motion or locking in extension may indicate mechanical symptoms.


Conditions

Tennis Elbow or Lateral Epicondylitis
This may also result from occupations that involve repetitive movements such as raking, painting or using a computer mouse. Typically caused by repetitive microtrauma that results in degeneration of the extensor carpi radialis brevis tendon. Repetitive eccentric muscle overload has been implicated. Less commonly, the extensor carpi radialis longus tendon will be the primary pathology. Individuals experiencing tennis elbow may complain of pain and tenderness over either of the two epicondyles. This pain increases with gripping or rotation of the wrist and forearm. If the condition becomes longstanding and chronic, a decrease in grip strength can develop. Heat or ice is helpful in relieving tennis elbow pain. Once acute symptoms have subsided, heat treatments are used to increase blood circulation and promote healing. The physician may recommend physical therapy to apply diathermy or ultrasound to the inflamed site. These are two common modalities used to increase the temperature of the tissues in order to address both pain and inflammation. Occasionally, a tennis elbow splint or taping may be useful to help decrease stress on the elbow throughout daily activities. Exercises become very important to improve flexibility to all forearm muscles, and will aid in decreasing muscle and tendon tightness that has been creating excessive pull at the common attachment of the epicondyle. Tennis elbow is usually curable; however, if symptoms become chronic, it is not uncommon for treatment to continue for three to six months Until symptoms of pain and inflammation subside, activities requiring repetitive wrist and forearm motion should be avoided. Once pain decreases to the point that return to activity can begin, the playing of sports, such as tennis, for long periods should not occur until excellent condition returns. Many times, choosing a different size or type of tennis racquet may help. Frequent rest periods are important despite what the wrist and forearm activity may be. Compliance with a stretching and strengthening program is very important in helping prevent recurring symptoms and exacerbation.
Golfers Elbow is pain in the region where the forearm flexor and pronator muscles fasten to the medial epicondyle of the humerus. It is also known as Medial Epicondylitis. Less common than Tennis Elbow. May occur in those who have never played golf. Seen in middle aged people whose sporting activity or occupation involves having a strong hand grip and adduction movements (moving the forearm in towards the body). It involves primarily the pronator teres and flexor carpi radialis. Pain is usually felt around the medial epicondyle, and is aggravated by gripping and wrist flexion. pain may also radiate down the forearm. Resisted wrist flexion whilst gripping the examiners fingers with the elbow straight and usually reproduces the pain. Pain can also be reproduced by resisted pronation (palm down). Stretching the flexor muscle group by extending the wrist with the elbow straight also reproduces the pain It is also sometimes associated with shoulder instability, decreased shoulder internal rotation, pronator inflexibility at the elbow, or a flexion contracture of the elbow Needs to be differentiated from referred pain from structures in the cervical spine (C8, T1 facet joints, muscle spasm, nerve entrapment) The strengthening program for clients with this condition is similar to that for clients with lateral epicondylitis, and employs tubing/bands and free weights for the wrist extensors. With medial epicondylitis, if at all possible, tubing/bands should be used during the wrist flexion strengthening exercise to emphasize both the eccentric and concentric phase of the flexor group. LA / steroid injections. Trigger Point Injections to tender muscular points around the inner elbow. Prolotherapy to help repair a torn common flexor origin at the medial epicondyle (beware injury to the ulnar nerve). Surgery (last resort) Flexor origin release - releasing the common flexor origin, debridement of granulation tissue, re-attaching the tendon\
The injury can occur with harmless movements like lifting a child out of the bath using one arm, or being swung round by an adult. Occurs usually before the age of 8 years with a peak incidence at 2-3 years. The left arm in girls is more commonly affected. The injury produces a click, after which the child refuses to use the arm due to severe pain. Minimal swelling All motions of the forearm are possible, except, supination. Diagnosis The head of the radius can be usually quite easily be manipulated back into place, without the need for sedation or a general anaesthetic. The child needs to be watched afterwards for recurrent subluxations. As the child grows the strength of the annular ligament increases so that further subluxations are unlikely beyond the age of 8 years. A rare condition with pain over the triceps insertion on the back of the elbow. Caused by sudden severe strains to the triceps e.g. javelin throwers. Pain is reproduced by resisted elbow extension and by passive elbow flexion. Treatment Rest and analgesics initially. LA / steroid injections. Prolotherapy to the triceps insertion (beware the ulnar nerve behind the medial epicondyle). Surgical debridement and tendon re-attachment. Olecranon Bursitis A condition where bursa (fluid filled sac) at the tip of the elbow becomes inflamed and painful. The olecranon bursa is a fluid filled sac allowing the skin of the elbow to slide easily over the bone without causing friction. When inflamed, the sac fills with synovial fluid becoming tense and painful. The bursa may become secondarily infected if the skin has been breached during an injury, in which case the bursa fills with pus rather than synovial fluid. Causes Direct blow to the tip of the elbow from a hard surface. Spending too much time leaning on the tip of the elbow. More common in those with Gout and Rheumatoid Arthritis Clinical Features A red tender fluctuant lump forms at the tip of the elbow. Treatment Rest and analgesics initially. If there is a suspicion of an infected bursa (broken skin, fever, chills, feeling unwell), the bursa should be drained with a needle and syringe, and the fluid sent for analysis at the laboratory, followed by the appropriate antibiotic orally. In the absence of infection, a LA / steroid injection can greatly help to reduce the pain and inflammation. In recurrent cases, surgical removal of the bursa is necessary. Cubital Tunnel Syndrome Cubital Tunnel Syndrome results when the ulnar nerve, which runs through the cubital tunnel on the inside of the elbow, is irritated by an injury or unusual pressure. The condition may occur when the elbow is frequently bent as in pulling and lifting, or from constant leaning. It can also occur from a direct injury. The pain resulting from the condition is similar to that experienced when the "funny bone" is hit. What many refer to as the "funny bone" is actually the ulnar nerve, which originates at the side of the neck, crosses at the elbow and ends in the fingers. The most common symptoms related to cubital tunnel syndrome include: numbness in the hand and/or ring and little fingers; general pain in the hand; and muscle weakness in the hand and thumb affecting grip strength and ability to perform certain activities. Symptoms are similar to golfer's elbow and should be ruled-out carefully by the physician.
Risk Factors
Cubital tunnel syndrome is most often seen in adults and can affect the athlete, laborer and office worker alike. An ambitious weekend project subjecting the elbow to unusual stress and pressure can result in the condition as well. Diagnosis Nerve conduction testing to determine the presence of nerve compression.
EMG at the forearm muscle to test muscle function. Poor muscle findings confirms the diagnosis.
Treatment
A number of conservative nonsurgical treatment options are available for cubital tunnel syndrome - including the cessation of irritating activity, a removable splint to limit movement and reduce irritation, an elbow pad to protect against hard surfaces and anti-inflammatory medication. And a patient-specific physical or occupational therapy program can also show significant improvement. In chronic cases nonresponsive to conservative treatment, surgery is indicated in order to release the pressure on the ulnar nerve, where it passes through the cubital tunnel. A number of different surgical procedures can accomplish this and are done as an outpatient procedure.

Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Anatomy The transverse carpal ligament forms the roof of the carpal tunnel, through which pass the flexor tendons and the median nerve. The median nerve supplies sensation to the thumb, index, middle and half of the ring finger, as well as the motor supply to some of the muscles of the hand. Causes
Overuse Occupational stress - either repetitive wrist flexion or extension whilst gripping firmly, may cause inflammation (tenosynovitis) of the flexor tendon sheaths (outer tendon lining). Rheumatoid arthritis patients are more prone to tendon sheath inflammation especially when using a walking stick. Previous injury Colles fracture Subluxation of the Lunate bone Osteoarthritis Wrist ganglion formation (out-pouching of the wrist joint capsule) Various metabolic conditions have been associated with it - gout, hypothyroidism, acromegaly, amyloidosis Clinical Findings Pain, tingling, and numbness in the outer three and a half fingers supplied by the nerve. The pain is most often felt at night, disturbing sleep, and relieved by dangling the arm out of bed. Some patients also describe pain radiating up to the forearm, arm, shoulder and neck. Weakness / clumsiness of some of the muscles in the hand. A proper examination of the neck, shoulder, and upper limb neurology is needed to exclude other causes of nerve entrapment in the neck and upper limb. The pain can be reproduced by pressing over the carpal tunnel with the thumb for about 1 minute. Tapping over the nerve (Tinel's sign) can also reproduce tingling of the affected fingers. Positive Phalen's Test - place both hands together palm to palm, both wrists extended to 90 degrees, with the forearms totally horizontal, and the hands close to the chest - the affected hand will tingle after 1-2 minutes. Positive Reverse Phalen's Test - do the same as above except with the hands back to back. Investigations EMG should help to localise the level of the nerve compression. X-rays to assess the degree of osteoarthritis in the wrist. Investigations to exclude the metabolic disorders mentioned above. Treatment Rest with a neutral splint, worn only at night if necessary. NSAIDs rarely help Injections around the nerve as it lies in the carpal tunnel can be useful. Beware injecting directly into the nerve. Gentle manipulation and mobilisation of the wrist joint in osteoarthritis can be useful. Particular attention should be paid to the range of wrist extension and suppleness of the flexor muscles. Surgery to decompress the carpal tunnel by releasing the transverse ligament, when conservative methods have failed and there is definite weakness in the hand
Osteoarthritis Pain and stiffness in the elbow can occur due to osteoarthritis (arthritis pain) and traumatic synovitis. Elbow movements become painful in all directions and there may be an effusion (joint fluid) palpable between the olecranon and lateral epicondyle behind the elbow joint. Rarely trauma can cause bleeding into the front of the joint capsule or the brachialis muscle producing a lump at the front of the elbow joint. If left untreated, the injury causes severe restriction of elbow extension with a fixed flexion deformity. The lump can become calcified and then it shows up on an X-ray as myositis ossificans. Treatment Rest and analgesics initially. Think about trying the Pain Gone Pen - a simple low-cost non-drug self-help pain device for home use. Intra-articular LA / steroid injection in the acute cases. Mobilisation techniques (I prefer to combine these with the intra-articular injection above). Viscosupplementation with Ostenil in the chronic cases. Surgical replacement for severely affected joints.

Bruising of skin and underlying tissues of the forearm caused by a direct blow. Contusions cause bleeding from ruptured small capillaries, allowing blood to infiltrate muscles, tendons or other soft tissue. Pain and tenderness in the forearm. Feeling of firmness when pressure is exerted on the injured area. Discoloration under the skin, beginning with redness and progressing to the characteristic "black and blue" bruise. Restricted forearm activity proportional to the extent of injury Tissues of the forearm, including blood vessels, muscles, tendons, nerves, covering to bone (periosteum) and connective tissue. Medical history of any bleeding disorder such as hemophilia. Poor nutrition, including vitamin deficiency. Use of anticoagulants or aspirin. Violent contact sports, especially when the forearm is not adequately protected. Medical history and physical exam by a doctor for all except minor injuries. X-rays of the injured area to assess total injury to soft tissue and to rule out the possibility of underlying fracture. Total extent of injury may not be apparent for 48 to 72 hours. Your own observation of symptoms. Wear appropriate protective gear and equipment during competition or other athletic activity if you have had a recent contusion or the activity makes a contusion likely. Wrap an elasticized bandage over a felt pad on the injured area. Keep the area compressed for about 72 hours. Continue ice massage. Fill a large Styrofoam cup with water and freeze. Tear a small amount of foam from the top so ice protrudes. Massage gently over the injured area in a circle about the size of a softball. Do this for 15 minutes at a time, 3 or 4 times a day, and before workouts or competition. After 72 hours, apply heat instead of ice if it feels better. Use heat lamps, hot soaks, hot showers, heating pads, heat liniments or ointments, or whirlpool treatments. Massage gently and often to provide comfort and decrease swelling. Use a sling to immobilize the arm. Prognosis Healing time varies with the extent of injury, but average healing time for forearm contusions is 2 to 3 weeks.

Ulnar Neuritis
Anatomy The nerve runs just inside the tip of the elbow (where your funny bone is) lying in a groove called the cubital canal and covered by the arcuate ligament. Most cases of compression occur at the level of this ligament, but can also occur between the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris muscle just below the elbow joint. Causes Direct blow to the elbow. Fractures of the elbow joint. Repetitive injuries like flexing the elbow (overuse) or leaning on it. Arthritis leading to joint deformity (rheumatoid). Clinical Findings Pain and tingling in the elbow and down the inside of the forearm to the little finger and half the ring finger (ulnar nerve territory). Clinical numbness on sensory testing. Feeling the ulnar nerve in the groove or tapping it (positive Tinel's sign), may reproduce symptoms down the forearm and into the little finger. Clumsiness of the hand due to weakness of the muscles supplied by the ulnar nerve. Clinical weakness on testing. Investigations EMG may help to differentiate between ulnar neuritis and other causes of C8 and T1 nerve irritation (cervical disc lesion, thoracic outlet syndrome), Treatment Avoid local repetitive trauma - consider using protective elbow pads. Avoid elbow flexion in the short term (not for chronic cases). Injections of LA / steroid may help either in the ulnar groove or between the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris. Beware local nerve injury by the needle. Surgery - moving the nerve out of the groove and into the front part of the elbow joint may help (Ulnar Transposition). The biceps muscle is found in the front of the upper arm and is attached to the shoulder and lower arm bone by tendons. It helps control lower arm movement and is particularly instrumental in the follow through of forceful throwing movements such as those in football or baseball. When the tendons are overused or overstressed, they become irritated and inflamed. This condition is called Biceps Tendonitis. It is often secondary to rotator cuff instability. Athletes, people who work manual jobs and people over the age of 40 are in the "high risk" category of developing forearm tendonitis. In particular, those who are starting a new exercise program or returning from exercise after a long absence are at risk. You should always ease back into exercise (see prevention below The symptoms of forearm tendonitis are the same as any other type of tendonitis (except calcific tendonitis). Here is a llist of common symptoms you may feel in the forearm area (see diagram above for pain areas). Pain in the forearm area. Swelling, redness or burning in the forearm. Stiffness and inability to move forearm freely. Pain at night and early in the morning. Difficulty performing hand movements (eg, making a fist). Grinding sounds when you move and rotate your forearm.
When the condition first develops, pain is usually felt during or after activity and then at night. As the tendonitis develops the pain will get worse and may be felt all day. Following patient history, physical examination and pain analysis, radiographic testing will confirm diagnosis. While athletes in throwing sports are often diagnosed with this condition, it can affect any active male or female who repetitively overuses the biceps muscle. A direct trauma or calcification in the tendon may also prompt the condition It's important that you begin treatment as soon as you feel the pain in your forearm. In most cases, forearm tendonitis can be cured without the need to see a doctor. You should apply R.I.C.E. treatment as soon as possible. R.I.C.E. treatment is the following: R est - rest the forearm. I ce - apply ice to the forearm for 20 minutes at a time. C ompression - apply light pressure to the forearm. E levation - elevating the forarm will help reduce pain. generally treated with a conservative nonsurgical program involving anti-inflammatory medication and cold compression. A rehabilitative exercise program designed to strengthen and promote flexibility of the shoulder stabilizers is developed. Depending on the severity of the pain, corticosteroid injections may be indicated in order to reduce the inflammation and pain. And an ongoing rehabilitation program is developed specifically to the patient in order to ensure a safe return to sport with no recurrence If you are away from exercise for an extended period of time, always ease back in slowly. It will take some time for your body to adjust to the stress of exercise. Always warm up, stretch and cool down when exercising. If you're weight training, don't train your muscle if they are still sore from the previous workout. Revover is important for strength and muscle growth.
If possible, aviod activites that place excess stress on the forearm.
If you experience forearm tendonitis, you are more likely to have symptoms again down the road, but with an intelligent approach to your exercise or activity routine, this problem can easily be avoided.


Median Neuritis
Anatomy The median nerve crosses in front of the lower humerus (arm bone) to the front of the elbow joint, and then passes between the two heads of pronator teres to reach the forearm. Some people have an anatomical abnormality at the elbow consisting of a spur called the Supracondylar Process, which forms a tunnel at the inside edge of the humerus bone covered by the Ligament of Struthers. The median nerve can be compressed in this tunnel. In others the nerve is compressed between the two heads of pronator teres muscle below the level of the elbow joint. Clinical Findings Sensory symptoms involve the outer three and a half fingers. Clinical numbness on testing. Weakness in the hand and forearm depends upon which level the compression occurs at involving forearm pronation, wrist flexion, and opposition of the thumb. If pronator teres is the problem, then the symptoms will be aggravated by pronation of the forearm (elbow straight, palm down). Investigations EMG, X-rays and MRI scanning are the investigations of choice. Surgical decompression may be helpful.

Anatomy The radial nerve at the elbow divides into two branches The sensory (superficial) branch supplies the outer forearm, base of the thumb, and back of the hand. The motor (deep) branch supplies the extensor muscles of the forearm, and is often known as the posterior interosseus nerve. It pierces the supinator muscle before entering the forearm. Clinical Findings Compression of the superficial branch causes pain and sensory symptoms in the forearm down to the base of the thumb. Numbness on clinical testing. The deep branch can be injured by direct blows to the forearm, and be compressed by an acutely inflamed arthritic elbow joint, causing pain and weakness of the wrist and forearm. Wasting of the extensor forearm muscles may be found in long standing cases, causing weakness of wrist and finger extension. Supinator Syndrome occurs when the radial nerve is compressed by the supinator muscle during repeated pronation/supination movements of the forearm. Diagnosis of radial tunnel syndrome can be difficult, as few tests have been effective in identifying it. Following a complete patient history and physical examination that may involve an assessment of pain in various arm positions, an electromyogram (EMG) may be indicated. An EMG will test to verify that muscles of the forearm are working properly or not. Improper functioning of the muscle is generally caused by the improper function of the supervising nerve.

A nerve conduction velocity (NCV) test may also be used, in order to measure the speed of an electrical impulse as it travels along the radial nerve. A slow speed indicates a compressed, or pinched nerve. Rest in acute cases. Splints, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and modification of work place activities in chronic cases.
The first phase of treatment for radial tunnel syndrome is conservative and includes refraining from the activity responsible for the condition, as well as those irritating the condition. A lightweight plastic removable arm splint may be indicated at night if pain worsens during sleep. A patient-specific physical or occupational therapy is established in order to increase the success of the other conservative treatment plans.

When the condition is nonresponsive to conservative treatment and symptoms persist, an outpatient procedure that helps to decompress the nerve may be indicated.

And following all treatment options is a rehabilitation program that demonstrates correct alignment and positions during activity. It also includes active forearm range of motion and stretching exercises - possibly combined with a soft-tissue massage. Isometric exercises following a surgical procedure helps to improve forearm hand strength while placing minimal stress on the tissues near the radial tunnel. Home Care for many cases of Elbow Pain
Prevention Avoid the activities with repetitive motions that causes the pain. Stretching forearm before, during and after the activity or exercise. Strengthening forearm muscles to sustain the activity. Observe proper biomechanics and ergonomics.
