Amen to that, my Sister or My Brother, because the northern American State of Michigan is naturally superb. And by that I mean a genuinely hospitable and friendly local population, and some really superb gifts from Mother Nature there too. Did I hear you say "yes please, I want to work in Michigan"? The listen up, and follow my advice.

The Lay of the Land

If someone tells you of a job that's open in say, the "Lower Peninsula" or the "Large Lake" you're going to need to know how to get there for the interview. Thus this little booklet of advice for job seekers must first begin with a short geography lesson.

A Wondrous World of Water



Michigan comprises two peninsulas at the northern extremity of the United States where it borders on Canada. These isthmuses touch four of the five magnificent water-stretches that contain 4/5ths of the United States' fresh water reserves. However, Michigan's Upper and Lower Peninsulas are linked by one of the longest suspension bridges in the world, stretching across the Straits of Mackinac that's said to separate them into different expanses.

Most of the State is well forested producing abundant oxygen. The southern parts of the Lower Peninsula are characterized by rural farmlands and industrialization, although the west coast offers several popular beach resorts. T he Upper Peninsula, on the other hand, is home to a variety of wildlife, while hosting winter ski resorts and trout fishing lodges too.

Lakes Superior, Erie and Huron account for a 3,000 mile-long (4,828 kilometer) freshwater shoreline. This means that when you're in Michigan you're never more than six miles (10 kilometers) from a river or a stream, and never more than 85 miles (137 kilometers) from one of the Great Lakes, where an endless procession of cargo ships passes by transporting the lifeblood of the nation.

Surprisingly enough, Detroit is not the capital of Michigan, d espite being the spot where the development of the State began back in 1701, when it was founded as a trading post. Instead, the honor went to Lansing - the attractive Victorian State Capitol was chosen in 1879 for its location in the center of the Lower Peninsula (which made it less vulnerable to invasion by British forces from Canada). It was but a humble sawmill settlement b ack then. Today Lansing competes with Detroit as a major motor manufacturing center, and is home to about 128,000 residents.

Some say the main attraction in the State of Michigan is its large industrial city, Detroit. For that was the city that put the world on wheels , and the birthplace of the mass-produced motor car thanks to Henry Ford. Hunting and fishing are also major draw cards for sportsmen who flock to Michigan throughout the year on account of all the water and the giant forests. You'll still find those self-same legendary names of automobile manufacturers like Ford and Chevrolet resounding loudly all over Detroit. And other numerous institutions and attractions paying homage to the motor car that seems to rule our lives.

A Place of Ancient History



After you've settled in a bit you need to explore Michigan a little first, because after all work is not everything, and you do need to live somewhere where you can fully appreciate the great outdoors. Here are some of Michigan's premier attractions (although of course it's by no means complete) - or intended to be, for that matter.

Porcupine Mountains

At the western corner of the northern peninsula of Michigan you'll find Porcupine Mountains Wilderness State Park that is a true gem for a great family vacation , and the largest State Park in Michigan too. It has many things to offer to families looking for adventure in the great outdoors. And it's accessible during all the seasons of the year. The Park got its name from the Ojibwa Indians, who named the 'small mountains' thus, because, with their tall trees, they looked like crouching porcupines. Visit in the spring as the leaves begin to bud. Call on it in the summer lambing season. Greet it in the Autumn as the leaves begin to fall. Love it in the winter skying season.

Its terrain is wild and rugged where it sits at the shoreline of Lake Superior, and inland where it embraces sixty-thousand acres of towering pines and sturdy birches and natural hemlock forests. The rivers teem with various species of trout as they cut through the forests. Thanks to the topography waterfalls are a common sight.

Campers have a choice between the Union Bay and Presque Isle campgrounds d uring spring and summer months. While Union Bay is the larger campground and offers electricity and showers, Presque Isle campground is very close to some really impressive waterfalls.

More Things to Do In Michigan

1. How About Visiting a few Museums? In fact, have you ever visited a museum before? Main attractions include:
The Detroit Institute of Art. Did you know that it is the fifth-largest fine art museum in the country? The Grand Rapids Art Museum. The Detroit Science Center that's geared to kids, and offers a host of family-friendly exhibits and galleries. The astonishing sensory experiences of the Museum's IMAX dome theater right next door. Your kids will thank you for your thoughtfulness. Michigan has wonderful world-class museums all the way from art to science to history.

2. The Romantic World of Lighthouses. The say some sailors have wives in every port. I'm unsure about all that. However every decent harbor needs a lighthouse, and Michigan has more lighthouses than any other State. These proud lighthouses continue to educate and serve us as a reminder of our state's grand maritime history. Most are fully renovated and some that also have become working public museums.

The sheer multitude of these historic gems bordering our Great Lakes means they have become a state icon. In fact, their tall and slender columns grace everything from lovely shorelines to picturesque wall calendars and greetings cards. If nothing else, you and your family will be treated to nature's grand brushstrokes of a sweeping, maritime landscape. Don't miss the opportunity to visit them any time you fancy!

3. Michigan's Great Beaches . Beaches seem everywhere in Michigan thanks to our abundant coastline. It's so easy to love during the humid, late summer months (and to admire them from a heated motor car in winter when the cold winds send the rain clouds and the gulls scudding). From my own experience, northwest and southwest Michigan provide some of the finest beach experiences. Some beaches are better than others of course, and that's why it's so important to pick the one that's right for you.



My other all-time favorites are Grand Haven, South Haven (where you can still see a magnificent century-old lighthouse at the end of south pier), Saint Josephs, and the Leland / Traverse City areas that are home to some truly remarkable beaches too.

If long stretches of soft, white sand, clean, blue water for swimming and boating, and quaint, lively towns brimming with restaurants, shops, and ice cream parlors are your beat, then you surely need to make these your required destinations! We already know there's absolutely nothing to beat mucking about in boats. Gazing across from them towards a romantic Michigan lighthouse comes a close second!

4. There's more to Detroit than Just Motor Cars

First Stop Greenfield Village

Farms, shops and people in historic costumes make Greenfield Village resemble a small village of the late 1800s thanks to its historical buildings. Breaking news is that the Thomas Edison workshop has just been relocated there. Kids of all ages just love going for a spin in a restored Model T , taking the steam engine around the complex, and riding in the carousel afterwards too.

Instant Gratification Henry Ford Museum

You just have to visit Henry Ford Museum Complex on Oakwood Boulevard, Dearborn, Zipcode 20900 which encompasses Greenfield Village and an IMAX theater. Vehicles in which history was made - like the bus on which Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat, and the car in which President John Kennedy was assassinated - are on view Visitors to the Henry Ford Museum are also most welcome to view displays of household appliances, airplanes, and a whole lot more fascinating exhibits.

A Fairlane is Not Just a Car

Everybody remembers the boat-like Ford Fairlanes with their magnificent straight-six powerhouses. Of course these days there are more modern versions too.
Few know though that the beautiful home of Henry Ford located on the campus of the University of Michigan in Dearborn was similarly called Tour Fairlane too. T he Edsel and Eleanor Ford home is even more impressive though, especially as it's the house that Henry's eldest son and heir built for his wife. Keep your eyes peeled for the brick structure built in the 1930s complete with electricity and running water, and d on't miss the chicken coops that belonged to the Ford's youngest daughter once.


Hiking in the Great Michigan

Are you ready for some exercise? Yes! So lace up your boots, and off you go. If you're looking to add a hike to your already-filled vacation itinerary (or for just that special half day with the kids) then you need not stress about staying fit as you explore those perfect Michigan hiking venues. Our hiking trails contain some of the top spots for hiking in America, such as Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore in the Upper Peninsula and the Sleeping Bear Dunes near Traverse City, but these are not the only possibilities when you look around. In fact, you'll find State and National Parks dotted throughout Michigan that have all kinds of trails to choose from.



Detroit

A discussion about Michigan and its jobs is incomplete without visiting Detroit, that great Auto Capital of the World. So drum-roll please. Prepare to meet the lady!

New Beginnings


The second Great Recession that America and Michigan and Detroit are just emerging from, had grave implications for local auto manufacturers. Read on to discover what individual citizens can achieve, when inspired by those immortal words "yes, we can".



Hordes of people gathered this month to call for action on the severe crisis still gripping Detroit (with the official unemployment rate now hovering over 20 percent) and to listen to what several inspiring speakers had to tell them..

"Grassroots groups are reaching out for the hope that blossomed last November. Plans are under way in this hard-hit city to change inertia into action from the bottom up. DETROIT 2012 (the recovery plan) is accelerating as those who voted for change could never have imagined."

( John Rummel, supporter of Obama's economic recovery program speaking at a rally in Detroit this week)

We needed a "Civic Marshall Plan" to rebuild this City's economic structure (with emphasis on green technology) just like the massive project to rebuild Europe after World War II."

(City Council Pro Tempore Jo-Ann Watson, member of ACORN and Labor Representative speaking at a press conference and rally at the Coleman Auditorium last week)

These outspoken advocates for saving the region's manufacturing jobs have traveled all the way to Washington to tell the U.S. House Committee on Housing and Banking why "bridge loans" to the auto industry were vital for their City.

" Houses are being foreclosed on as we speak. Food and fuel are costing more and people are losing their jobs. People are suffering. Fortunately Congress stood behind President Obama and supported the economic recovery bill that brought help to those Americans most in need - the low just and moderate-income people. We couldn't wait any longer."

( ACORN member Charles Jackson speaking at the gathering)

ACORN (great oak trees are inspired to grow from the real ones) is insisting on extended unemployment benefits, a twenty percent increase in food stamps, additional rental assistance, and funds to provide jobs in the low-income areas of Detroit.

"The problem isn't that autoworkers make too much money; it's that most people don't make enough to hang on, on their own"

(Al Benchich, Retired President of Union of Auto Workers (UAW) Local Fraternity 909)

Al also addressed Congress as follows:
We need to reopen plants that are closed, build wind turbines, solar panels and high speed mass transit We've got things that need to be made, we've got plants that are closed that could be making them, and we've got people not working that could be working to do the work We want to reinvest in the nation's infrastructure, work hand in hand with Barrack Obama, shape an industrial policy that will create new jobs, stop home foreclosures and provide affordable health care for everyone. "We need to get this going for the whole State of Michigan and not just for Detroit. We can't lie down. We've got to fight for the things we need. We've got to get other people involved and come together."

"If you don't get involved in your life, who will care about you? "

(Jamesie Morgan, ACORN National Board Member and Chair of its Detroit branch, speaking to the crowd)

According to Jobs-with-Justice leader Bill Bryce, there are still insufficient jobs and little justice for the unemployed. That's why it's important to support the Employee Free Choice Act, and allow workers to freely unionize.

How Little Could You Earn in Michigan?



Of course, jobs are paid on merit in America, and that's the way it ought to be. That doesn't mean we abide slave labor though, and we've put laws in place to set the rules for entry-level pay.


Improve Your Prospects Through Self-Study

There's a power of good to be had through qualifications, and these days thanks to the internet this can all happen after hours on the web. Here's a list of Michigan's best Online Colleges. Follow the links, and see what you can find!

It's time long past we ceased complaining, pulled out boots back on and went out to plow the fields again. If you've got a zest for work and a determination to succeed then we've got work for you (but if you're looking for an easy ride please go someplace else).


The hopes and dreams of jobs for all in Michigan are finding expression in the Talent Bank, that's an internet meeting-place for employers and job seekers. However like most things in life there are rules to follow when a likely prospect presents itself. Increase your chances of selection when you observe the following advice.


What You Can Expect

First and foremost, Michigan Works! does not 'place' you in a job (u nlike some other operations) . Instead, we provide a toolbox for discovering your own caterpulting career path, and proceeding down it. Be sure that Michigan Works! has a variety of customizable job search services. And that's consistently true, whether you're a seasoned professiona l or a recent graduate.

Getting Started
Ask yourself what kind of job best fits your skills and interests. If you're uncomfortable with computers you're invited to attend one of our free Basic Computing workshops in a genuine classroom! Alternatively, you could attend a virtual class by visiting one of the websites we list below.
michigan.gov/careers/

monster.com

livecareer.com

online.onetcenter.org

projectcareer.com
Did you know that 70% of Southwest MI jobs are in Advanced Manufacturing, Healthcare, Construction / Skilled Trades, and Hospitality? That's why it's essential to understand local labor market conditions in the area you're targeting (and perhaps move on if the match is bad). So find out how your skills and interests match up to projected industry trends. Alternatively, why not click on Hot Careers, Occupational Outlook Handbook, or MI Labor Market Info right now?
Michigan Works! has access to the State's largest online database and posts new jobs every day! L og on to Search for Jobs in your Local Area to see hundreds of local opportunities. You could also try michworks.org, monster.com or careerbuilder.com if not satisfied.
Polish your resume and cover letter before you send it to employers to p ut your best foot forward. Do practice interviews with different friends and you'll make a winning impression on the day!
Most people apply for many jobs before they land the right one. Don't give up! And please don't become dispirited. Rome was not built in a single day. If at first you don't succeed . . . remember Bill Gates and Richard Branson, and try, try and try again. Identify what might be holding you back and then ask a Michigan Works! professional how you can improve those areas that are not your best. They are here to help you! Accept the free offer,

Special resources

Special employment resources are available for individuals with disabilities, migrant / seasonal farm workers, and specified war veterans. Take a moment to explore the services offered by the partner agencies too:
Telamon Corporatio Veterans Employment Service Michigan Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Progra Michigan Rehabilitation Services

Your Michigan Interview

That's great! You've got an invitation to attend an interview! Now you need to plan for it, and prepare yourself so you're the obvious (and only) person for the job.

How do you envisage my career path expanding? Do you consider yourself a caring employer, and why? Do you have a merit-based remuneration system?
How soon can I start? What induction and training will I receive?
Good Luck

I do really mean that sincerely. In fact, I already feel as if I know you quite well. One final hint. A positive approach breeds a positive approach. So feel good about yourself as you apply for jobs and attend interviews. I sense you're going to find a job in Michigan sooner than you may think ...