The online version of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel is also very comprehensive, and well worth looking at if you live in the Milwaukee area. There are sections covering news for Milwaukee, Waukesha, Washington, Ozaukee, Racine and Wisconsin.

There are also up to date local weather reports.
The website of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel has an extensive archive or news articles which is great if you want to read up on past news stories. You can search for articles by keyword so if you're interested in a particular event or sports team you can find all the articles on your chosen topic quickly and easily.


The Politics Plus section covers presidential elections,local and state elections, with political commentary. A Watchdog section covers consumer issues in depth, and there is a huge sports coverage too. With information on local teams and coverage of a wide range of sports

and sports columnists Michael Hunt, Garry D. Howard, Bob Wolfley and Norman Chad giving their expert opinion on the sporting events of the area. There is plenty of information about local teams such as the Brewers and the Green Bay Packers.


The Watchdog section of great interest as it covers a wide range of topics and helps bring awareness of scams and issues to be aware of. Topics cover anything from legal issues, to chemicals in our foods that may be dangerous to us.


There are plenty of other features too, from lifestyle sections covering cookery and gardening, to business features and entertainment. There is a comprehensive photo and video section to give you materials that you simply can't offer in print.

You'll also find interactive graphics and informative downloadable pdf documents to supplement your reading and give you further knowledge on the topics that interest you most.


You can read the views of columnists such as Jim Stingl, Laurel Walker, Daniel Bice, Helen Pauly and Eugene Kane who regularly give their opinion on recent news stories.

There are plenty of blogs to read too that are regularly updated with news and views.

There really is a blog to suit everyone:
Dogged is an extension of the Journal Sentinel's famous Watchdog section. Public Investigator Blog is written by Ellen Gabler and Raquel Rutledge chasing leads, and solving problems.
Proof and Hearsay covers crime and court in the area, while Milwaukee Homicides takes a closer look at murder in the city. All Politics Blog gives you a daily dose of political news with some behind the scenes glimpses. Columnist Eugene Kane offers perspectives on the news and social issues in his blog Raising Kane. Across the Board is The Journal Sentinel Editorial blog on the day's happenings as they happen. Right On written by c olumnist Patrick McIlheran gives a right-wing commentary.
Extra Points is the blog of Michael Hunt, a Milwaukee Journal Sentinel columnist and features local and national sports information. Badgers Blog also covers sports news and insider information for football, basketball and other sports. There are specific blogs for fans of local teams too such as Bucks Blog that cover news and analysis of the Milwaukee Bucks, Golden Eagles Blog that features the latest news of the Marquette men's basketball team, Brewers Blog for Brewers fans and Packers Blog for the fans of the Green Bay Packers. If you're a fan of car racing then a read of Dave Kallmann's Racing Beat blog is not to be missed. Don Walker offers a different view of the sporting world with his The Business of Sports blog. Gold Beat by Gary D'Amato cover golf in Wisconsin, and there is a blog dedicated to state college athletics too. Off The Couch is for anyone in Wisconsin who loves outdoors sports and exercise, from skiing to hiking.
If entertainment is your thing, there are plenty of blogs for you too. Film critic Duane Dudek gives his opinion on the state of the movie world in Dudek on Film. Inside TV and Radio is the blog of TV and radio critic Tim Cuprisin, Art and architecture critic Mary Louise Schumacher explores Milwaukee's creative world in Art City and Technology reporter Stanley A. Miller II looks at the best new gadgets to the latest stuff on the Web in his blog Gear, Games and Life Online.
Writer Thomas Content blogs about energy, climate change and building a greener economy in his blog Plugged In. Land and Space is the blog of Journal Sentinel business reporter Tom Daykin where he discusses commercial real estate and development, and b usiness writer Doris Hajewski follows developments in the local retail industry in Shop Talk.
Taste Buds, written by members of the Journal Sentinel food team features foodie content and recipes. Readers' Restaurant Picks brings you information on eateries in the Milwaukee area. Joanne Weintraub's blog Losing It will provide inspiration and advice for any dieters, Milwaukee Mirror takes a look at local style and fashion and Alison Sherwood shares her struggles and triumphs while learning to cook in Post-College Kitchen.
Latino Connection is the blog of Journal Sentinel reporter Georgia Pabst covering the Latino community in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and beyond. School Zone sees The Journal Sentinel education reporters offering news and notes. Wasted in Wisconsin covers Wisconsin's drinking culture, laws, news and issues while Mahal in Milwaukee k eeps you up to date with a baby orangutan at the Milwaukee County Zoo. A nimal Magnetism is a pet blog written by Jackie Loohauis-Bennett.


The Journal is also well known for its special in depth reports. One such report involved A team of Journal Sentinel reporters spending a whole a year looking into the drinking culture of Wisconsin. Evaluating studies, , breath testing drinkers, creating and analyzing databases and conducting surveys among the residents of Wisconsin. Over this period they examined over two hundred court files and conducted over 200 interviews. You can see from this level of commitment that they are truly dedicated to the research for their in depth special reports.


The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel also has several RSS feeds you can subscribe to so you'll receive the latest news and updates direct to your computer or mobile phone. You can receive news headlines of course, but you can also subscribe to receive book reviews, contests, horoscopes, entertainment news and much more. All the RSS feeds are free to subscribe to and you can unsubscribe easily at any time.


For anyone wishing to supplement their income, there are many jobs available delivering the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel too. The deliveries must be completed by 6am and you can earn up to $1200 a month.


If you have any tips on news stories you can submit the information via an online form direct to the newsroom for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reporters to look into.